Beyond neural scaling laws:
beating power law scaling via data pruning
Ben Sorscher∗ ∗1 Robert Geirhos∗2 Shashank Shekhar3
Surya Ganguli1,3§ Ari S. Morcos3§
∗equal contribution
1Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University
2University of Tübingen
3Meta AI (FAIR)
§Joint senior authors
Abstract
Widely observed neural scaling laws, in which error falls off as a power of the
training set size, model size, or both, have driven substantial performance im-
provements in deep learning. However, these improvements through scaling alone
require considerable costs in compute and energy. Here we focus on the scaling of
error with dataset size and show how in theory we can break beyond power law
scaling and potentially even reduce it to exponential scaling instead if we have
access to a high-quality data pruning metric that ranks the order in which training
examples should be discarded to achieve any pruned dataset size. We then test
this improved scaling prediction with pruned dataset size empirically, and indeed
observe better than power law scaling in practice on ResNets trained on CIFAR-10,
SVHN, and ImageNet. Next, given the importance of ﬁnding high-quality pruning
metrics, we perform the ﬁrst large-scale benchmarking study of ten different data
pruning metrics on ImageNet. We ﬁnd most existing high performing metrics
scale poorly to ImageNet, while the best are computationally intensive and require
labels for every image. We therefore developed a new simple, cheap and scalable
self-supervised pruning metric that demonstrates comparable performance to the
best supervised metrics. Overall, our work suggests that the discovery of good
data-pruning metrics may provide a viable path forward to substantially improved
neural scaling laws, thereby reducing the resource costs of modern deep learning.
1 Introduction
Empirically observed neural scaling laws [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] in many domains of machine learning,
including vision, language, and speech, demonstrate that test error often falls off as a power law with
either the amount of training data, model size, or compute. Such power law scaling has motivated
signiﬁcant societal investments in data collection, compute, and associated energy consumption.
However, power law scaling is extremely weak and unsustainable. For example, a drop in error
∗work done during an internship at Meta AI (FAIR)
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
arXiv:2206.14486v6  [cs.LG]  21 Apr 2023
Pareto
frontier
Test error (%)
Theory
Simulation
100%
Frac. data kept
77%
60%
46%
36%
28%
22%
17%
13%
10%
Training examples per parameter (               )
Keep easy
examples
Keep hard
examples
ResNet18 on CIFAR-10D Information gain per example
Keep easy 
examples
Keep hard
examples
Perceptron in teacher-student setting
Total examples
Perceptron in teacher-student setting Test accuracy (%)
Keep hard 
examples
when total 
data is
abundant Keep easy 
examples
when total 
data is 
scarce
B
CA
F
E
Information (nats)
Frac. data kept
Frac. data kept
acckeep hard- acckeep easy (%)acckeep hard- acckeep easy (%)
Frac. data kept
Frac. data kept
Total examples per parameter (           ) Training examples per parameter (               )
Training examples per parameter (               )
Figure 1: Our analytic theory of data pruning predicts that power law scaling of test error with respect
to dataset size can be beaten. A: Test error as a function of αprune = f αtot with θ = 0. We observe
an excellent match between our analytic theory (solid curves) and numerical simulations (dots) of
perceptron learning at parameters N=200 (here: N=200 constant throughout ﬁgure). The red curve
indicates the Pareto optimal test error ε achievable from a tradeoff between αtot and f at ﬁxedαprune.
B: We ﬁnd that when data is abundant (scarce) corresponding to large (small)αtot, the better pruning
strategy is to keep the hard (easy) examples. C: Color indicates difference in test error in keeping
hard versus easy examples, revealing the change in strategy in (B). D: We tested this prediction on a
ResNet18 trained on CIFAR-10, ﬁnding remarkably the same shift in optimal pruning strategy under
the EL2N metric. E: Test accuracy as a function of f and αprune. For every ﬁxedαprune, there is an
optimal fopt (purple curve). F: I(αprune) for different f.
from 3% to 2% might require an order of magnitude more data, compute, or energy. In language
modeling with large transformers, a drop in cross entropy loss from about 3.4 to 2.8 nats2 requires 10
times more training data (Fig. 1 in [2]). Also, for large vision transformers, an additional 2 billion
pre-training data points (starting from 1 billion) leads to an accuracy gain on ImageNet of a few
percentage points (Fig. 1 in [7]). Here we ask whether we might be able to do better. For example,
can we achieve exponential scaling instead, with a good strategy for selecting training examples?
Such vastly superior scaling would mean that we could go from 3% to 2% error by only adding a few
carefully chosen training examples, rather than collecting 10× more random ones.
Focusing on scaling of performance with training dataset size, we demonstrate that exponential
scaling is possible, both in theory and practice. The key idea is that power law scaling of error
with respect to data suggests that many training examples are highly redundant. Thus one should
in principle be able to prune training datasets to much smaller sizes and train on the smaller pruned
datasets without sacriﬁcing performance. Indeed some recent works [9, 10, 11] have demonstrated
this possibility by suggesting various metrics to sort training examples in order of their difﬁculty or
importance, ranging from easy or redundant examples to hard or important ones, and pruning datasets
by retaining some fraction of the hardest examples. However, these works leave open fundamental
theoretical and empirical questions: When and why is successful data pruning possible? What are
good metrics and strategies for data pruning? Can such strategies beat power law scaling? Can they
scale to ImageNet? Can we leverage large unlabeled datasets to successfully prune labeled datasets?
We address these questions through both theory and experiment. Our main contributions are:
1. Employing statistical mechanics, we develop a new analytic theory of data pruning in the
student-teacher setting for perceptron learning, where examples are pruned based on their
teacher margin, with large (small) margins corresponding to easy (hard) examples. Our
theory quantitatively matches numerical experiments and reveals two striking predictions:
2However, note that nats is on a logarithmic scale and and small improvements in nats can lead to large
improvements in downstream tasks.
2
(a) The optimal pruning strategy changes depending on the amount of initial data; with
abundant (scarce) initial data, one should retain only hard (easy) examples.
(b) Exponential scaling is possible with respect to pruned dataset size provided one chooses
an increasing Pareto optimal pruning fraction as a function of initial dataset size.
2. We show that the two striking predictions derived from theory hold also in practice in much
more general settings. Indeed we empirically demonstrate signatures of exponential scaling
of error with respect to pruned dataset size for ResNets trained from scratch on SVHN,
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, and Vision Transformers ﬁne-tuned on CIFAR-10.
3. Motivated by the importance of ﬁnding good quality metrics for data pruning, we perform a
large scale benchmarking study of 10 different data pruning metrics at scale on ImageNet,
ﬁnding that most perform poorly, with the exception of the most compute intensive metrics.
4. We leveraged self-supervised learning (SSL) to developed a new, cheapunsupervised data
pruning metric that does not require labels, unlike prior metrics. We show this unsupervised
metric performs comparably to the best supervised pruning metrics that require labels and
much more compute. This result opens the door to the exciting possibility of leveraging
pre-trained foundation models to prune new datasets even before they are labeled.
Overall these results shed theoretical and empirical insights into the nature of data in deep learning
and our ability to prune it, and suggest our current practice of collecting extremely large datasets may
be highly inefﬁcient. Our initial results in beating power law scaling motivate further studies and
investments in not just inefﬁcently collecting large amounts of random data, but rather, intelligently
collecting much smaller amounts of carefully selected data, potentially leading to the creation and
dissemination of foundation datasets, in addition to foundation models [12].
2 Background and related work
Our work brings together 3 largely disparate strands of intellectual inquiry in machine learning: (1)
explorations of different metrics for quantifying differences between individual training examples;
(2) the empirical observation of neural scaling laws; and (3) the statistical mechanics of learning.
2.1 Pruning metrics: not all training examples are created equal
Several recent works have explored various metrics for quantifying individual differences between
data points. To describe these metrics in a uniform manner, we will think of all of them as ordering
data points by their difﬁculty, ranging from “easiest” to “hardest.” When these metrics have been
used for data pruning, the hardest examples are retained, while the easiest ones are pruned away.
EL2N scores. For example [10] trained small ensembles (of about 10) networks for a very short
time (about 10 epochs) and computed for every training example the average L2 norm of the error
vector (EL2N score). Data pruning by retaining only the hardest examples with largest error enabled
training from scratch on only 50% and 75% of CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 respectively without any
loss in ﬁnal test accuracy. However the performance of EL2N on ImageNet has not yet been explored.
Forgetting scores and classiﬁcation margins. [9] noticed that over the entire course of training,
some examples are learned early and never forgotten, while others can be learned and unlearned (i.e.
forgotten) repeatedly. They developed a forgetting score which measures the degree of forgetting of
each example. Intuitively examples with low (high) forgetting scores can be thought of as easy (hard)
examples. [9] explored data pruning using these metrics, but not at ImageNet scale.
Memorization and inﬂuence. [13] deﬁned a memorization score for each example, corresponding
to how much the probability of predicting the correct label for the example increases when it is
present in the training set relative to when it is absent (also see [ 14]); a large increase means the
example must be memorized (i.e. the remaining training data do not sufﬁce to correctly learn this
example). Additionally [ 13] also considered an inﬂuence score that quantiﬁes how much adding
a particular example to the training set increases the probability of the correct class label of a test
example. Intuitively, low memorization and inﬂuence scores correspond to easy examples that are
redundant with the rest of the data, while high scores correspond to hard examples that must be
3
individually learned. [13] did not use these scores for data pruning as their computation is expensive.
We note since memorization explicitly approximates the increase in test loss due to removing each
individual example, it is likely to be a good pruning metric (though it does not consider interactions).
Ensemble active learning. Active learning iterates between training a model and selecting new
inputs to be labeled [15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. In contrast, we focus on data pruning: one-shot selection
of a data subset sufﬁcient to train to high accuracy from scratch. A variety of coreset algorithms
(e.g. [20]) have been proposed for this, but their computation is expensive, and so data-pruning has
been less explored at scale on ImageNet. An early clustering approach [ 21] allowed training on
90% of ImageNet without sacriﬁcing accuracy. Notably [11] reduced this to 80% by training a large
ensemble of networks on ImageNet and using ensemble uncertainty to deﬁne the difﬁculty of each
example, with low (high) uncertainty corresponding to easy (hard) examples. We will show how to
achieve similar pruning performance without labels or the need to train a large ensemble.
Diverse ensembles (DDD). [22] assigned a score to every ImageNet image, given by the number of
models in a diverse ensemble (10 models) that misclassiﬁed the image. Intuitively, low (high) scores
correspond to easy (hard) examples. The pruning performance of this metric remains unexplored.
Summary. We note: (1) only one of these metrics has tested well for its efﬁcacy in data pruning
at scale on ImageNet; (2) all of these metrics require label information; (3) there is no theory of
when and why data pruning is possible for any of these metrics; and (4) none of these works suggest
the possibility of exponential scaling. We thus go beyond this prior work by benchmarking the data
pruning efﬁcacy of not only these metrics but also a new unsupervised metric we introduce that
does not require label information, all at scale on ImageNet. We also develop an analytic theory for
data-pruning for the margin metric that predicts not only the possibility of exponential scaling but
also the novel ﬁnding that retaining easy instead of hard examples is better when data is scarce.
2.2 Neural scaling laws and their potential inefﬁciency
Recent work [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] has demonstrated that test lossL often falls off as a power law
with different resources like model parameters (N), number of training examples (P ), and amount
of compute ( C). However, the exponents ν of these power laws are often close to 0, suggesting
potentially inefﬁcient use of resources. For example, for large models with lots of compute, so
that the amount of training data constitutes a performance bottleneck, the loss scales asL≈ P−ν.
Speciﬁcally for a large transformer based language model, ν = 0 .095, which implies an order
of magnitude increase in training data drops cross-entropy loss by only about 0.6 nats (Fig. 1 in
[2]). In neural machine translation experiments ν varies across language pairs from 0.35 to 0.48
(Table 1 in [5]). Interestingly, [ 8] explored a ﬁxed computation budget C and optimized jointly
over model size N and training set size P , revealing that scaling both N and P commensurately as
C increases is compute optimal, and can yield smaller high performing models (trained on more
data) than previous work. Nevertheless, for a transformer based language model, a 100× increase in
compute, corresponding to 10× increases in both model size and training set size, leads to a drop in
cross-entropy loss of only about 0.5 nats (Fig. 2 in [8]). Similar slow scaling holds for large vision
transformers where adding 2 billion pre-training images reduces ImageNet performance by a few
percentage points (Fig. 1 in [7]). While all of these results constitute signiﬁcant improvements in
performance, they do come at a substantial resource cost whose fundamental origin arises from power
law scaling with small exponents. Recent theoretical works [23, 24, 25] have argued that the power
law exponent is governed by the dimension of a data manifold from which training examples are
uniformly drawn. Here we explore whether we can beat power law scaling through careful data
selection.
2.3 Statistical mechanics of perceptron learning
Statistical mechanics has long played a role in analyzing machine learning problems (see e.g.
[26, 27, 28, 29] for reviews). One of the most fundamental applications is perceptron learning in
the student-teacher setting [30, 31], in which random i.i.d. Gaussian inputs are labeled by a teacher
perceptron to construct a training set. The test error for another student perceptron learning from this
training set then scales as a power law with exponent−1 for such data. Such perceptrons have also
been analyzed in an active learning setting where the learner is free to design any new input to be
4
labeled [32, 33], rather than choose from a ﬁxed set of inputs, as in data-pruning. Recent work [34]
has analyzed this scenario but focused on message passing algorithms that are tailored to the case of
Gaussian inputs and perceptrons, and are hard to generalize to real world settings. In contrast we
analyze margin based pruning algorithms that are used in practice in diverse settings, as in [9, 10].
3 An analytic theory of data pruning
To better understand data pruning, we employed the replica method from statistical mechanics [35] to
develop an analytic theory of pruning for the perceptron in the student-teacher setting [26] (see App. A
for detailed derivations of all results). Consider a training dataset of P examples{xµ, yµ}µ=1,...,P
where xµ∈ RN are i.i.d. zero mean unit variance random Gaussian inputs and yµ = sign(T· xµ)
are labels generated by a teacher perceptron with weight vector T∈ RN . We work in the high
dimensional statistics limit where N, P→∞ but the ratio αtot = P
N of the number of total training
examples to parameters remains O(1). We then consider a pruning algorithm used in [9, 10], namely:
(1) train a probe student perceptron for very few epochs on the training data, obtaining weights Jprobe;
(2) compute the margin mµ = Jprobe· (yµxµ) of each training example, where large (small) margins
correspond to easy (hard) examples; (3) construct a pruned dataset of size Pprune = f P, where f is
the fraction of examples kept, by retaining the Pprune hardest examples, (4) train a new perceptron to
completion on the smaller dataset with a smaller ratio αprune = Pprune
N of examples to parameters.
We are interested in the test error ε of this ﬁnal perceptron as a function of αtot, f, and the angle
θ between the probe student Jprobe and the teacher T. Our theory approximates Jprobe as simply a
random Gaussian vector conditioned to have angle θ with the teacher T. Under this approximation
we obtain an analytic theory for ε(αtot, f, θ) that is asymptotically exact in the high dimensional limit
(App. A). We ﬁrst examine results whenθ = 0, so we are pruning training examples according to
their veridical margins with respect to the teacher (Fig. 1A). We ﬁnd two striking phenomena, each
of which constitute predictions in real-world settings that we will successfully conﬁrm empirically.
The best pruning strategy depends on the amount of initial data. First, we note the test error
curve for f = 1 in Fig. 1A corresponding to no pruning, or equivalently to randomly pruning a
larger dataset of size αtot down to a size αprune, exhibits the well known classical perceptron learning
power law scaling ε∝ α−1
prune. Interestingly though, for small αtot, keeping the hardest examples
performs worse than random pruning (lighter curves above darkest curve for small αprune in Fig. 1A).
However, for large αtot, keeping the hardest examples performs substantially better than random
pruning (lighter curves below darkest curve for large αprune in Fig. 1A). It turns out keeping the
easiest rather than hardest examples is a better pruning strategy when αtot is small (Fig. 1C). If one
does not have much data to start with, it is better to keep the easiest examples with largest margins
(i.e. the blue regions of Fig. 1B) to avoid overﬁtting. The easiest examples provide coarse-grained
information about the target function, while the hard examples provide ﬁne-grained information
about the target function which can prevent the model from learning if one starts with lots of data.
In cases where overﬁtting is less of an issue, it is best to keep the hardest examples with smallest
margin that provide more information about the teacher’s decision boundary (i.e. the green region of
Fig. 1B). Intuitively, in the limited data regime, it is challenging to model outliers since the basics are
not adequately captured; hence, it is more important to keep easy examples so that the model can get
to moderate error. However, with a larger dataset, the easy examples can be learned without difﬁculty,
making modeling outliers the fundamental challenge.
Fig. 1C reveals which pruning strategy is best as a joint function of αtot and f. Note the transition
between optimal strategies becomes sharper at small fractions f of data kept. This transition between
optimal pruning strategies can be viewed as a prediction in more general settings. To test this
prediction we trained a ResNet18 on pruned subsets of the CIFAR-10 dataset (Fig. 1D), and observed
strikingly similar behavior, indicating the prediction can hold far more generally, beyond perceptron
learning. Interestingly, [9, 10] missed this transition, likely because they started pruning from large
datasets.
Pareto optimal data pruning can beat power law scaling. A second prediction of our theory is
that when keeping a ﬁxed fraction f of the hardest examples as αtot increases (i.e. constant color
curves in Fig. 1A), the error initially drops exponentially in αprune = f αtot, but then settles into
the universal power law ε∝ α−1
prune for all ﬁxed f. Thus there is no asymptotic advantage to data
5
A B C D
Theory
Simulation
Theory
Simulation
20%
Frac. data
kept
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Training examples per parameter
 (               )
Training examples per parameter
 (               )
Training examples per parameter
 (               )
Error
Figure 2: Data pruning with an imperfect metric. A: Weight vectors and decision boundaries for a
teacher (black) and probe student (red) separated by angle θ. The black point has margin 0 (κ) w.r.t.
the probe (teacher). B–D: Test error as a function of αprune for different f and different θ.
pruning at a ﬁxedf. However, by pruning more aggressively (smallerf) when given more initial data
(larger αtot), one can achieve a Pareto optimal test error as a function of pruned dataset sizeαprune that
remarkably traces out at least an exponential scaling law (Fig. 1A, purple curve). Indeed our theory
predicts for each αprune a Pareto optimal point in αtot and f (subject to αprune = f αtot), yielding for
every ﬁxedαprune an optimal fopt, plotted in Fig. 1E. Note fopt decreases with αprune indicating more
aggressive pruning (smaller fopt) of original datasets of larger size αtot is required to obtain larger
Pareto optimal pruned datasets of size αprune. We will test this striking scaling prediction in Fig. 3.
Beating power law scaling: an information-theoretic perspective. Classical randomly selected
data generates slow power law error scaling because each extra training example provides less new
information about the correct decision boundary than the previous example. More formally, letS(αtot)
denote the typical entropy of the posterior distribution over student perceptron weights consistent
with a training set of size αtot. The information gain I(αtot) due to additional examples beyond αtot
can be deﬁned as the rate at which the posterior entropy is reduced: I(αtot) =− d
dαtot
S(αtot). In
classical perceptron learning I(αtot) decays to zero as a power law in αtot, reﬂecting a vanishing
amount of information per each new example, leading to the slow power law decay of test error
ε∝ α−1
tot . However, data pruning can increase the information gained per example by pruning away
the uninformative examples. To show this, we generalized the replica calculation of the posterior
entropy S and information gain I from random datasets of size αtot to pruned datasets of size αprune
(App. A). We plot the resulting information gain I(αprune) for different f in Fig. 1F. For any ﬁxed
f, I(αprune) will eventually decay as a power law as α−1
prune. However, by more aggressively pruning
(smaller f) datasets of larger size αtot, I(αprune) can converge to a ﬁnite valueI(∞) = 1 nat/example,
resulting in larger pruned datasets only adding useful non-redundant information. Since each new
example under Pareto optimal data pruning conveys ﬁnite information about the target decision
boundary, as seen in Fig. 1F, the test error can decay at least exponentially in pruned dataset size
as in Fig. 1A. Classical results [31] have shown that training examples chosen by maximizing the
disagreement of a committee of student perceptrons can provide an asymptotically ﬁnite information
rate, leading to exponential decay in test error. Intriguingly, the Pareto-optimal data pruning strategy
we study in this work leads to faster than exponential decay, because it includes (partial) information
about the target function provided by the probe student (Fig. 11).
An imperfect pruning metric yields a cross over from exponential to power law scaling. We
next examine the case of nonzero angle θ between the probe student Jprobe and the teacher T, such
that the ranking of training examples by margin is no longer completely accurate (Fig. 2A). Retaining
the hard examples with smallest margin with respect to the probe student will always result in pruned
datasets lying near the probe’s decision boundary. But if θ is large, such examples might be far from
the teacher’s decision boundary, and therefore could be less informative about the teacher (Fig. 2A).
As a result our theory, conﬁrmed by simulations, predicts that under nonzero angles θ, the Pareto
optimal lower envelope of test error over both αtot and f initially scales exponentially as a function
of αprune = f αtot but then crosses over to a power law (Fig. 2BCD). Indeed, at any given nonzeroθ,
our theory reveals that as αtot (and therefore αprune) becomes large, one cannot decrease test error any
further by retaining less than a minimum fraction fmin(θ) of all available data. For example when
θ = 10◦ (θ = 20◦) one can do no better asymptotically than pruning down to 24% (46%) of the total
6
Pareto
frontier
ResNet18 on SVHN
Training examples Training examples
Pareto
frontier
Test error (top-5 %)
Test error (%)
Test error  (%)
Perceptron in teacher-student settingA B C D
Pareto
frontier
ResNet18 on CIFAR-10 ResNet50 on ImageNet
Theory
Simulation
Pareto
frontier
20%
Frac. data kept
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
20%
Frac. data kept
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
20%
Frac. data kept
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1%
Frac. data kept
2%
3%
5%
8%
13%
22%
36%
60%
100%
Training examplesTraining examples per parameter
 (              )
Figure 3: Beating power law scaling in practice. A–D: Curves of test error against pruned dataset
size in 4 settings. Pruning scores were EL2N [10] for CIFAR-10 and SVHN and memorization [13]
for ImageNet. See App. B for all pruning/training details and App. D for similar ImageNet plots
with EL2N. Note solid curves reﬂect performance with a ﬁxed total dataset size; if we prune more
aggressively with even larger datasets, scaling could improve further (e.g., dashed lines inA). Error
curves with no data pruning (f = 1) are labeled with their best-ﬁt power law scaling∼ α−ν. (Note
that for SVHN in B an asymptotic constant error E(P→∞ ) = 1.1% is subtracted from each of the
curves to visualize the power law scaling more clearly.)
Test error on CIFAR-10
Fine-tuning examples
Pareto
frontier
A B
Frac. of ImageNet used for pretraining
ResNet50 /f_inetuned on CIFAR-10
Test accuracy (%)
0.751.0 0.5 0.25 0
Figure 4: Data pruning improves transfer
learning. A: CIFAR-10 performance of
a ViT pre-trained on all of ImageNet21K
and ﬁne-tuned on different pruned subsets
of CIFAR-10 under the EL2N metric. B:
CIFAR-10 performance of ResNet50s pre-
trained on different pruned subsets of Ima-
geNet1K and ﬁne-tuned on all of CIFAR-
10.
data (Fig. 2CD). As θ approaches 0, fmin(θ) approaches 0, indicating that one can prune extremely
aggressively to arbitrarily small f while still improving performance, leading to at least exponential
scaling for arbitrarily large αprune in Fig. 2B. However, for nonzero θ, the lack of improvement
for f < f min(θ) at large αprune renders aggressive pruning ineffective. This result highlights the
importance of ﬁnding high quality pruning metrics withθ≈ 0. Such metrics can delay the cross over
from exponential to power law scaling as pruned dataset size αprune increases, by making aggressive
pruning with very small f highly effective. Strikingly, in App. Fig. 10 we demonstrate this cross-over
in a real-world setting by showing that the test error on SVHN is bounded below by a power law
when the dataset is pruned by a probe ResNet18 under the EL2N metric, trained for 4 epochs (weak
pruning metric) but not a probe ResNet18 trained for 40 epochs (strong pruning metric).
4 Data pruning can beat power law scaling in practice
Our theory of data pruning for the perceptron makes three striking predictions which can be tested in
more general settings, such as deep neural networks trained on benchmark datasets: (1) relative to
random data pruning, keeping only the hardest examples should help when the initial dataset size
is large, but hurt when it is small; (2) data pruning by retaining a ﬁxed fraction f of the hardest
examples should yield power law scaling, with exponent equal to that of random pruning, as the
initial dataset size increases; (3) the test error optimized over both initial data set size and fraction
of data kept can trace out a Pareto optimal lower envelope that beats power law scaling of test error
as a function of pruned dataset size, through more aggressive pruning at larger initial dataset size.
We veriﬁed all three of these predictions on ResNets trained on SVHN, CIFAR-10, and ImageNet
using varying amounts of initial dataset size and fractions of data kept under data pruning (compare
theory in Fig. 3A with deep learning experiments in Fig. 3BCD). In each experimental setting we see
better than power law scaling at larger initial data set sizes and more aggressive pruning. Moreover
we would likely see even better scaling with even larger initial datasets (as in Fig.3A dashed lines).
7
Data pruning improves transfer learning. Modern foundation models are pre-trained on a large
initial dataset, and then transferred to other downstream tasks by ﬁne-tuning on them. We therefore
examined whether data-pruning can be effective for both reducing the amount of ﬁne-tuning data and
the amount of pre-training data. To this end, we ﬁrst analyzed a vision transformer (ViT) pre-trained on
ImageNet21K and then ﬁne-tuned on different pruned subsets of CIFAR-10. Interestingly, pre-trained
models allow for far more aggressive data pruning; ﬁne-tuning on only 10% of CIFAR-10 can match
or exceed performance obtained by ﬁne tuning onall of CIFAR-10 (Fig. 4A). Furthermore Fig. 4A
provides a new example of beating power law scaling in the setting of ﬁne-tuning. Additionally, we
examined the efﬁcacy of pruning pre-training data by pre-training ResNet50s on different pruned
subsets of ImageNet1K (exactly as in Fig. 3D) and then ﬁne-tuning them on all of CIFAR-10.
Fig. 4B demonstrates pre-training on as little as 50% of ImageNet can match or exceed CIFAR-10
performance obtained by pre-training on all of ImageNet. Thus intriguingly pruning pre-training data
on an upstream task can still maintain high performance on a different downstream task. Overall
these results demonstrate the promise of data pruning in transfer learning for both the pre-training
and ﬁne-tuning phases.
A B
C
Top-5 accuracy (%)
Frac. data kept
Frac. data kept
self-supervised prototypes
in/f_luencesum-abs supervis
ed
prototypes
1.0             0.95              0.9             0.85            0.8             0.75             0.7             0.65            0.6
1.0              0.95              0.9              0.85              0.8              0.75              0.7              0.65              0.6
Figure 5: Dataset pruning at ImageNet scale. A: Spearman’s rank correlation between all pairs of
ImageNet metric scores, along with hierarchical clustering (as provided by seaborn.clustermap).
B: Benchmarking existing supervised metrics on ImageNet (top-5 validation accuracy). C: Compar-
ing top-5 performance on ImageNet when pruning according to the best existing supervised metric
(memorization) and our supervised and self-supervised prototype metrics. In all 3 cases, training on
80% of ImageNet approximates training on 100%. See App. B for pruning and training details.
5 Benchmarking supervised pruning metrics on ImageNet
We note that the majority of data pruning experiments have been performed on small-scale datasets
(i.e. variants of MNIST and CIFAR), while the few pruning metrics proposed for ImageNet have
rarely been compared against baselines designed on smaller datasets. Therefore, it is currently unclear
how most pruning methods scale to ImageNet and which method is best. Motivated by how strongly
the quality of a pruning metric can impact performance in theory (Fig. 2), we decided to ﬁll this
knowledge gap by performing a systematic evaluation of 8 different supervised pruning metrics on
ImageNet: two variants of inﬂuence scores [ 13], two variants of EL2N [10], DDD [22], memorization
[13], ensemble active learning [11], and forgetting [9]. See Section 2 for a review of these metrics.
Additionally, we include two new prototypicality metrics that we introduce in the next section.
We ﬁrst asked how consistent the rankings induced by different metrics are by computing the
Spearman rank correlation between each pair of metrics (Fig. 5A). Interestingly, we found substantial
diversity across metrics, though some (EL2N, DDD, and memorization) were fairly similar with rank
correlations above 0.7. However, we observed marked performance differences between metrics:
Fig 5BC shows test performance when a fraction f of the hardest examples under each metric are
kept in the training set. Despite the success of many of these metrics on smaller datasets, only a
8
few still match performance obtained by training on the full dataset, when selecting a signiﬁcantly
smaller training subset (i.e. about 80% of ImageNet). Nonetheless, most metrics continue to beat
random pruning, with memorization in particular demonstrating strong performance (Fig. 5C). We
note that data pruning on ImageNet may be more difﬁcult than data pruning on other datasets, because
ImageNet is already carefully curated to ﬁlter out uninformative examples.
We found that all pruning metrics amplify class imbalance, which results in degraded performance.
To solve this we used a simple 50% class balancing ratio for all ImageNet experiments. Further
details and baselines without class balancing are shown in App. H. Metric scores, including baselines,
are available from https://github.com/rgeirhos/dataset-pruning-metrics.
6 Self-supervised data pruning through a prototypicality metric
Fig. 5 shows many data pruning metrics do not scale well to ImageNet, while the few that do require
substantial amounts of compute. Furthermore, all these metrics require labels, thereby limiting their
ability to prune data for large-scale foundation models trained on massive unlabeled datasets [12].
Thus there is a clear need for simple, scalable, self-supervised pruning metrics.
To compute a self-supervised pruning metric for ImageNet, we perform k-means clustering in the
embedding space of an ImageNet pre-trained self-supervised model (here: SWaV [36]), and deﬁne
the difﬁculty of each data point by the cosine distance to its nearest cluster centroid, or prototype.
Thus easy (hard) examples are the most (least) prototypical. Encouragingly, in Fig. 5C, we ﬁnd
our self-supervised prototype metric matches or exceeds the performance of the best supervised
metric, memorization, until only 70–80% of the data is kept, despite the fact that our metric does not
use labels and is much simpler and cheaper to compute than many previously proposed supervised
metrics. See App. Fig. 9 for further scaling experiments using the self-supervised metric.
To assess whether the clusters found by our metric align with ImageNet classes, we compared their
overlaps in Fig. 6A. Interestingly, we found alignment for some but not all classes. For example, class
categories such as snakes were largely aligned to a small number of unsupervised clusters, while
other classes were dispersed across many such clusters. If class information is available, we can
enforce alignment between clusters and classes by simply computing a single prototype for each
class (by averaging the embeddings of all examples of this class). While originally intended to be an
additional baseline metric (called supervised prototypes, light blue in Fig 5C), this metric remarkably
outperforms other supervised metrics and largely matches the performance of memorization, which
is prohibitively expensive to compute. Moreover, the performance of the best self-supervised and
supervised metrics are similar, demonstrating the promise of self-supervised pruning.
One important choice for the self-supervised prototype metric is the number of clusters k. We found,
reassuringly, our results were robust to this choice: k can deviate one order of magnitude more or
less than the true number of classes (i.e. 1000 for ImageNet) without affecting performance (App. F).
To better understand example difﬁculty under various metrics, we visualize extremal images for our
self-supervised prototype metric and the memorization metric for one class (Fig 6B,C). Qualitatively,
easy examples correspond to highly similar, redundant images, while hard examples look like
idiosyncratic outliers. See App. E, Figs. 12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19 for more classes and metrics.
Snakes InsectsDogs Primates Vehicles Food
ImageNet class (sorted by wordnet hierarchy)
SSL cluster (sorted hierarchically)
A B C
self-supervised prototypes memorization
Figure 6: A: Heat map where each row denotes the probability that images in a given cluster come
from each ImageNet class. B: The four easiest and hardest images under our self-supervised pruning
metric and the best previously published supervised metric (memorization, shown inC) for ImageNet
class 100 (black swan ).
9
7 Discussion
Summary. We have shown, both in theory and practice, how to break beyond slow power law
scaling of error versus dataset size to faster exponential scaling, through data pruning. Additionally we
have developed a simple self-supervised pruning metric that enables us to discard 20% of ImageNet
without sacriﬁcing performance, on par with the best and most compute intensive supervised metric.
Limitations. The most notable limitation is that achieving exponential scaling requires a high
quality data pruning metric. Since most metrics developed for smaller datasets scale poorly to
ImageNet, our results emphasize the importance of future work in identifying high quality, scalable
metrics. Our self-supervised metric provides a strong initial baseline. Moreover, a key advantage of
data pruning is reduced computational cost due to training on a smaller dataset for the same number
of epochs as the full dataset (see App. C). However, we found that performance often increased when
training on the pruned dataset for the same number of iterations as on the full dataset, resulting in
the same training time, but additional training epochs. However, this performance gain saturated
before training time on the pruned dataset approached that on the whole dataset (App. J) thereby still
yielding a computational efﬁciency gain. Overall this tradeoff between accuracy and training time on
pruned data is important to consider in evaluating potential gains due to data pruning. Finally, we
found that class-balancing was essential to maintain performance on data subsets (App. H). Future
work will be required to identify ways to effectively select the appropriate amount of class-balancing.
Ethical considerations. A potential negative societal impact could be that data-pruning leads to
unfair outcomes for certain groups. We have done a preliminary analysis of how data-pruning affects
performance on individual ImageNet classes (App. I), ﬁnding no substantial differential effects across
classes. However proper fairness tests speciﬁc to deployment settings should always be conducted on
every model, whether trained on pruned data or not. Additionally, we analyzed the impact of pruning
on OOD performance (App. K).
Outlook: Towards foundation datasets. We believe the most promising future direction is the
further development of scalable, unsupervised data pruning metrics. Indeed our theory predicts that
the application of pruning metrics on larger scale datasets should yield larger gains by allowing more
aggressive pruning. This makes data pruning especially exciting for use on the massive unlabeled
datasets used to train large foundation models (e.g. 400M image-text pairs for CLIP [ 37], 3.5B
Instagram images [ 38], 650M images for the DALLE-2 encoder [ 39], 780B tokens for PALM
[40]). If highly pruned versions of these datasets can be used to train a large number of different
models, one can conceive of such carefully chosen data subsets as foundation datasets in which
the initial computational cost of data pruning can be amortized across efﬁciency gains in training
many downstream models, just at the initial computational cost of training foundation models is
amortized across the efﬁciency gains of ﬁne-tuning across many downstream tasks. Together, our
results demonstrate the promise and potential of data pruning for large-scale training and pretraining.
Acknowledgments
We thank Priya Goyal, Berﬁn Simsek, Pascal Vincent valuable discussions, Qing Jin for insights
about the optimal pruning distribution, Isaac Seessel for VISSL support as well as Kashyap Chitta
and José Álvarez for kindly providing their ensemble active learning score.
References
[1] Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan
Kianinejad, Md Patwary, Mostofa Ali, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning scaling is
predictable, empirically. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00409, 2017.
[2] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
[3] Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson,
Heewoo Jun, Tom B Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, et al. Scaling laws for autoregressive
generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14701, 2020.
10
[4] Jonathan S. Rosenfeld, Amir Rosenfeld, Yonatan Belinkov, and Nir Shavit. A constructive
prediction of the generalization error across scales. International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2020.
[5] Mitchell A Gordon, Kevin Duh, and Jared Kaplan. Data and parameter scaling laws for
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 5915–5922, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic,
November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[6] Danny Hernandez, Jared Kaplan, Tom Henighan, and Sam McCandlish. Scaling laws for
transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01293, 2021.
[7] Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scaling vision transform-
ers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04560, 2021.
[8] Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
[9] Mariya Toneva, Alessandro Sordoni, Remi Tachet des Combes, Adam Trischler, Yoshua Bengio,
and Geoffrey J Gordon. An empirical study of example forgetting during deep neural network
learning. In ICLR, 2019.
[10] Mansheej Paul, Surya Ganguli, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Deep learning on a data diet:
Finding important examples early in training. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 34, December
2021.
[11] Kashyap Chitta, José M Álvarez, Elmar Haussmann, and Clément Farabet. Training data subset
search with ensemble active learning. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., pages 1–12, 2021.
[12] Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von
Arx, Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the
opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
[13] Vitaly Feldman and Chiyuan Zhang. What neural networks memorize and why: Discovering
the long tail via inﬂuence estimation. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 33:2881–2891, 2020.
[14] Hrayr Harutyunyan, Alessandro Achille, Giovanni Paolini, Orchid Majumder, Avinash
Ravichandran, Rahul Bhotika, and Stefano Soatto. Estimating informativeness of samples
with smooth unique information. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2021.
[15] Burr Settles. Active learning literature survey. Technical Report, 2009.
[16] Antoine Bordes, Seyda Ertekin, Jason Weston, Léon Botton, and Nello Cristianini. Fast kernel
classiﬁers with online and active learning.J. Mach. Learn. Res., 6(9), 2005.
[17] Zeyad Ali Sami Emam, Hong-Min Chu, Ping-Yeh Chiang, Wojciech Czaja, Richard Leapman,
Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. Active learning at the ImageNet scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2111.12880, 2021.
[18] Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00489, 2017.
[19] Siddharth Karamcheti, Ranjay Krishna, Li Fei-Fei, and Christopher D Manning. Mind your
outliers! Investigating the negative impact of outliers on active learning for visual question
answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.02331, 2021.
[20] Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Jeff Bilmes, and Jure Leskovec. Coresets for data-efﬁcient training
of machine learning models. In Hal Daumé Iii and Aarti Singh, editors, Proceedings of the
37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 6950–6960. PMLR, 2020.
[21] V Birodkar, H Mobahi, and S Bengio. Semantic redundancies in Image-Classiﬁcation datasets:
The 10% you don’t need. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.11409, 2019.
[22] Kristof Meding, Luca M. Schulze Buschoff, Robert Geirhos, and Felix A. Wichmann. Trivial or
impossible—dichotomous data difﬁculty masks model differences (on ImageNet and beyond).
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
[23] Utkarsh Sharma and Jared Kaplan. Scaling laws from the data manifold dimension. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 23(9):1–34, 2022.
11
[24] Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jared Kaplan, Jaehoon Lee, and Utkarsh Sharma. Explaining
neural scaling laws. CoRR, abs/2102.06701, 2021.
[25] Jonathan S. Rosenfeld. Scaling Laws for Deep Learning. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, USA, 2021.
[26] A Engel and C V den Broeck. Statistical Mechanics of Learning. Cambridge Univ. Press, 2001.
[27] Madhu Advani, Subhaneil Lahiri, and Surya Ganguli. Statistical mechanics of complex neural
systems and high dimensional data. J. Stat. Mech: Theory Exp., 2013(03):P03014, 2013.
[28] Yasaman Bahri, Jonathan Kadmon, Jeffrey Pennington, Sam S Schoenholz, Jascha Sohl-
Dickstein, and Surya Ganguli. Statistical mechanics of deep learning. Annual Review of
Condensed Matter Physics, March 2020.
[29] Lenka Zdeborová and Florent Krzakala. Statistical physics of inference: thresholds and
algorithms. Adv. Phys., 65(5):453–552, September 2016.
[30] E Gardner. The space of interactions in neural network models. J. of Physics A, 21:257–270,
1988.
[31] H S Seung, H Sompolinsky, and N Tishby. Statistical mechanics of learning from examples.
Phys. Rev. A, 45(8):6056, 1992.
[32] Yoav Freund, H Sebastian Seung, Eli Shamir, and Naftali Tishby. Information, prediction, and
query by committee. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 5, 1992.
[33] Hai-Jun Zhou. Active online learning in the binary perceptron problem. Commun. Theor. Phys.,
71(2):243, February 2019.
[34] Hugo Cui, Luca Saglietti, and Lenka Zdeborovà. Large deviations in the perceptron model and
consequences for active learning, 2021.
[35] M Mezard, G Parisi, and M A Virasoro. Spin glass theory and beyond . World scientiﬁc
Singapore, 1987.
[36] Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. In H. Larochelle,
M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 9912–9924. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
[37] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
[38] Dhruv Mahajan, Ross Girshick, Vignesh Ramanathan, Kaiming He, Manohar Paluri, Yixuan Li,
Ashwin Bharambe, and Laurens Van Der Maaten. Exploring the limits of weakly supervised
pretraining. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pages
181–196, 2018.
[39] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical
text-conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
[40] Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
[41] Priya Goyal, Quentin Duval, Jeremy Reizenstein, Matthew Leavitt, Min Xu, Benjamin
Lefaudeux, Mannat Singh, Vinicius Reis, Mathilde Caron, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin,
and Ishan Misra. VISSL. https://github.com/facebookresearch/vissl, 2021.
[42] Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. ImageNet large scale visual
recognition challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision, 115(3):211–252, 2015.
[43] Kaiyu Yang, Klint Qinami, Li Fei-Fei, Jia Deng, and Olga Russakovsky. Towards fairer datasets:
Filtering and balancing the distribution of the people subtree in the ImageNet hierarchy. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , pages
547–558, 2020.
12
[44] Yuki M Asano, Christian Rupprecht, Andrew Zisserman, and Andrea Vedaldi. PASS:
An ImageNet replacement for self-supervised pretraining without humans. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.13228, 2021.
[45] Ross Wightman. Pytorch image models. https://github.com/rwightman/
pytorch-image-models, 2019.
[46] Justin M Johnson and Taghi M Khoshgoftaar. Survey on deep learning with class imbalance.
Journal of Big Data, 6(1):1–54, 2019.
[47] Robert Geirhos, Kantharaju Narayanappa, Benjamin Mitzkus, Tizian Thieringer, Matthias
Bethge, Felix A Wichmann, and Wieland Brendel. Partial success in closing the gap between
human and machine vision. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:23885–
23899, 2021.
[48] Felix A Wichmann, David HJ Janssen, Robert Geirhos, Guillermo Aguilar, Heiko H Schütt,
Marianne Maertens, and Matthias Bethge. Methods and measurements to compare men against
machines. Electronic Imaging, Human Vision and Electronic Imaging, 2017(14):36–45, 2017.
[49] Robert Geirhos, Carlos RM Temme, Jonas Rauber, Heiko H Schütt, Matthias Bethge, and
Felix A Wichmann. Generalisation in humans and deep neural networks. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2018.
[50] Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A. Wichmann, and
Wieland Brendel. ImageNet-trained CNNs are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias
improves accuracy and robustness. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2019.
[51] Haohan Wang, Songwei Ge, Zachary Lipton, and Eric P Xing. Learning robust global repre-
sentations by penalizing local predictive power. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 32, 2019.
[52] Robert Geirhos, Kristof Meding, and Felix A Wichmann. Beyond accuracy: quantifying trial-
by-trial behaviour of CNNs and humans by measuring error consistency. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
[53] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectiﬁers:
Surpassing human-level performance on ImageNet classiﬁcation. InProceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 1026–1034, 2015.
[54] John P Miller, Rohan Taori, Aditi Raghunathan, Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Vaishaal
Shankar, Percy Liang, Yair Carmon, and Ludwig Schmidt. Accuracy on the line: on the strong
correlation between out-of-distribution and in-distribution generalization. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 7721–7735. PMLR, 2021.
13
Appendix
Table of Contents
A A theory of data-pruning for the perceptron: detailed derivations 14
A.1 Problem setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
A.2 Main result and overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
A.3 Replica calculation of the generalization error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
A.4 Quenched entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
A.5 Perfect teacher-probe overlap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
A.6 Information gain per example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
A.7 Imperfect teacher-probe overlap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
A.8 Optimal pruning policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
A.9 Exact saddle point equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
B Model training method details & dataset information 31
C Breaking compute scaling laws via data pruning 32
D Additional scaling experiments 33
E Extremal images according to different metrics 33
F Impact of number of clusters k on self-supervised prototypes 44
G Impact of ensemble prototypes 44
H Relationship between pruning and class (im-)balance 44
I Effect of pruning on class-conditional accuracy and fairness 50
J Interaction between data pruning and training duration 50
K Out-of-distribution (OOD) analysis of dataset pruning 51
A A theory of data-pruning for the perceptron: detailed derivations
All code required to reproduce the theory ﬁgures and numerical simulations throughout this paper can
be run in the Colab notebook at https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1in35C6jh7y_
ynwuWLBmGOWAgmUgpl8dF?usp=sharing.
A.1 Problem setup
In this section we introduce a theory for data pruning in the teacher-student perceptron setting, using
the tools of statistical mechanics. We study the problem of classifying a dataset of P examples
{xµ, yµ}µ=1,...,P , where xµ∼N (0, IN) are i.i.d. zero mean unit variance random Gaussian inputs,
and yµ = sign(T· x) are labels generated by a teacher perceptron T∈ RN , which we will assume
is randomly drawn from a uniform distribution on the sphere T∼ Unif(SN−1(
√
N)). We work in
the high-dimensional statistics limit where N, P→∞ but the ratio αtot = P/N remains O(1). The
generalization error of a perceptron trained on such an isotropic dataset is a classical problem (see
e.g. [26]). However, we are interested in the setting where the training dataset is not isotropic, but
instead has inherited some structure due to data pruning.
14
In particular, consider pruning the training dataset by keeping only the examples with the smallest
margin|zµ| = |Jprobe· xµ| along a probe student Jprobe. The pruned dataset will follow some
distribution p(z) along the direction of Jprobe, and remain isotropic in the nullspace of Jprobe. In
what follows we will derive a general theory for an arbitrary data distribution p(z), and specialize
to the case of small-margin pruning only at the very end (in which case p(z) will take the form of a
truncated Gaussian). We will also make no assumptions on the form of the probe student Jprobe or the
learning rule used to train it; only that Jprobe has developed some overlap with the teacher, quantiﬁed
by the angle θ = cos−1 ( Jprobe·T
∥Jprobe∥2∥T∥2
)
(Fig. 2A).
After the dataset has been pruned, we consider training a new student J from scratch on the pruned
dataset. A typical training algorithm (used in support vector machines and the solution to which
SGD converges on separable data) is to ﬁnd the solution J which classiﬁes the training data with
the maximal margin κ = minµ J· (yµxµ). Our goal is to compute the generalization error εg
of this student, which is simply governed by the overlap between the student and the teacher,
εg = cos−1(R)/π, where R = J· T/∥J∥2∥T∥2.
A.2 Main result and overview
Our main result is a set of self-consistent equations which can be solved to obtain the generalization
error ε(α, p, θ) for any α and any data distribution p(z) along a probe student at any angle θ relative
to the teacher. These equations take the form,
R− ρ cos θ
sin2 θ = α
πΛ
⟨ ∫ κ
−∞
dt exp
(
−∆(t, z)
2Λ2
)
(κ− t)
⟩
z
(1)
1− ρ2 + R2− 2ρR cos θ
sin2 θ = 2α
⟨ ∫ κ
−∞
dt e
− (t−ρz)2
2(1−ρ2 )
√
2π
√
1− ρ2 H
( Γ(t, z)√
1− ρ2Λ
)
(κ− t)2
⟩
z
(2)
ρ− R cos θ
sin2 θ = 2α
⟨ ∫ κ
−∞
dt e
− (t−ρz)2
2(1−ρ2 )
√
2π
√
1− ρ2 H
( Γ(t, z)√
1− ρ2Λ
)(z− ρt
1− ρ2
)
(κ− t)
+ 1
2πΛ exp
(
−∆(t, z)
2Λ2
) (ρR− cos θ
1− ρ2
)
(κ− t)
⟩
z
(3)
Where,
Λ =
√
sin2 θ− R2− ρ2 + 2ρR cos θ, (4)
Γ(t, z) = z(ρR− cos θ)− t(R− ρ cos θ), (5)
∆(t, z) = z2 (
ρ2 + cos2 θ− 2ρR cos θ
)
+ 2tz(R cos θ− ρ) + t2 sin2 θ. (6)
Where⟨·⟩z represents an average over the pruned data distribution p(z) along the probe student.
For any α, p(z), θ, these equations can be solved for the order parameters R, ρ, κ, from which the
generalization error can be easily read off as εg = cos−1(R)/π. This calculation results in the solid
theory curves in Figs 1,2,3, which show an excellent match to numerical simulations. In the following
section we will walk through the derivation of these equations using replica theory. In Section A.6
we will derive an expression for the information gained per training example, and show that with
Pareto optimal data pruning this information gain can be made to converge to a ﬁnite rate, resulting
in at least exponential decay in test error. In Section A.7, we will show that super-exponential scaling
eventually breaks down when the probe student does not match the teacher perfectly, resulting in
power law scaling at at a minimum pruning fraction fmin(θ).
A.3 Replica calculation of the generalization error
To obtain Eqs. 1,2,3, we follow the approach of Elizabeth Gardner and compute the volume
Ω(xµ, T, κ) of solutions J which perfectly classify the training data up to a margin κ (known as the
15
Gardner volume) [30, 26]. As κ grows, the volume of solutions shrinks until it reaches a unique
solution at a critical κ, the max-margin solution. The Gardner volume Ω takes the form,
Ω(xµ, T, κ) =
∫
dµ(J)
∏
µ
Θ
(T· xµ
√
N
(J· xµ
√
N
− κ
))
(7)
Because the student’s decision boundary is invariant to an overall scaling of J, we enforce normaliza-
tion of J via the measure dµ(J),
dµ(J) = 1
(2πe)N/2 δ(∥J∥2− N) (8)
In the thermodynamic limit N, P→∞ the typical value of the entropy S(κ) =⟨⟨log Ω(xµ, T, κ)⟩⟩
is dominated by particular values of R, κ, where the double angle brackets⟨⟨·⟩⟩ denote a quenched
average over disorder introduced by random realizations of the training examples xµ and the teacher
T. However, computing this quenched average is intractable since the integral over J cannot be
performed analytically for every individual realization of the examples. We rely on the replica trick
from statistical physics,
ln(x) = lim
n→0
xn− 1
n (9)
Which allows us to evaluate S(κ) in terms of easier-to-compute powers of Ω,
S(κ) =⟨⟨ln Ω(xµ, T, κ)⟩⟩ =⟨⟨Ωn(xµ, T, κ)⟩⟩− 1
n (10)
This reduces our problem to computing powers of Ω, which for integer n can be written in terms of
α = 1, . . . , nreplicated copies of the original system,
Ω(n)≡⟨⟨ Ωn(xµ, T, κ)⟩⟩ =
⟨⟨ ∫ n∏
α=1
dµ(Jα)
∏
α,µ
Θ
(T· xµ
√
N
(J· xµ
√
N
− κ
))⟩⟩
(11)
We begin by introducing auxiliary variables,
λα
µ = Jα· xµ
√
N
, u µ = T· xµ
√
N
(12)
by δ−functions, to pull the dependence on J and T outside of the Heaviside function,
Ω(n) =
∫ n∏
α=1
dµ(Jα)
∫ ∏
α,µ
dλα
µ
∫ ∏
µ
duµ
∏
α,µ
Θ
(
uµ(λα
µ− κ)
)
×
⟨⟨
δ
(
λα
µ− 1√
N
Jα· xµ
)
δ
(
uµ− 1√
N
T· xµ
)⟩⟩
(13)
Using the integral representation of the δ-functions,
Ω(n) =
∫ n∏
α=1
dµ(Jα)
∫ ∏
α,µ
dλα
µdˆλα
µ
2π
∫ ∏
µ
duµdˆuµ
2π (14)
×
∏
α,µ
Θ
(
uµ(λα
µ− κ)
)
exp
(
i
∑
µ,α
λα
µˆλα
µ + i
∑
µ
uµˆuµ
)
(15)
×⟨⟨ exp
(
− i√
N
∑
µ,α
ˆλα
µJα· xµ− i√
N
∑
µ
ˆuµT· xµ
)
⟩⟩ (16)
16
The data obeys some distribution p(z) along the direction of Jprobe and is isotropic in the nullspace of
Jprobe. Hence we can decompose a training examplexµ as follows, xµ = Jprobezµ+(I−JprobeJT
probe)sµ,
where zµ∼ p(z) and sµ∼N (0, IN),
Ω(n) =
∫ n∏
α=1
dµ(Jα)
∫ ∏
α,µ
dλα
µdˆλα
µ
2π
∫ ∏
µ
duµdˆuµ
2π (17)
×
∏
α,µ
Θ
(
uµ(λα
µ− κ)
)
exp
(
i
∑
µ,α
λα
µˆλα
µ + i
∑
µ
uµˆuµ
)
(18)
×
⟨⟨
exp
(
− i√
N
∑
µ,α
ˆλα
µ(Jα· Jprobezµ + Jα
⊥· sµ)− i√
N
∑
µ
ˆuµ(T· Jprobezµ + T⊥· sµ
)⟩⟩
(19)
Where J⊥ = (1− JprobeJT
probe)J and T⊥ = (1− JprobeJT
probe)T. Now we can average over the patterns
sµ∼N (0, IN),
⟨
exp
(
− i√
N
∑
µ,α
ˆλα
µJα
⊥· sµ− i√
N
∑
µ
ˆuµT⊥· sµ
)⟩
sµ
= exp
(
− 1
2N∥
∑
µ,α
ˆλα
µJα
⊥ + ˆuµT⊥∥2
)
(20)
= exp
(
− 1
2N
∑
µ
(∑
αβ
ˆλα
µˆλβ
µJα
⊥· Jβ
⊥ + 2
∑
α
ˆλα
µ ˆuµJα
⊥· T⊥ + ˆu2
µ∥T⊥∥2
))
. (21)
Inserting this back into our expression for the Gardner volume,
Ω(n) =
∫ n∏
α=1
dµ(Jα)
∫ ∏
α,µ
dλα
µdˆλα
µ
2π
∫ ∏
µ
duµdˆuµ
2π
×
∏
α,µ
Θ
(
uµ(λα
µ− κ)
)
exp
(
i
∑
µ,α
λα
µˆλα
µ + i
∑
µ
uµˆuµ
)
×
⟨⟨
exp
[
− 1
2N
∑
µ
(∑
αβ
ˆλα
µˆλβ
µJα
⊥· Jβ
⊥ + 2
∑
α
ˆλα
µ ˆuµJα
⊥· T⊥ + ˆu2
µ∥T⊥∥2
)
− i
∑
µ
(∑
α
ˆλα
µJα· Jprobe + ˆuµT· Jprobe
)
zµ
]⟩⟩
T,zµ
(22)
As is typical in replica calculations of this type, we now introduce order parameters,
qαβ = Jα· Jβ
N , R α = T· Jα
N (23)
which will allow us to decouple the J- from the λ-µ-z- integrals. qαβ represents the overlaps between
replicated students, and Rα the overlap between each replicated student and the teacher. However,
because our problem involves the additional role of the probe student, we must introduce an additional
order parameter,
ρα = Jα· Jprobe
N (24)
which represents the overlap between each replicated student and the probe student. Notice that,
Jα
⊥· Jβ
⊥ = Jα· Jβ− Jα
∥· Jβ
∥ = N(qαβ− ραρβ) (25)
17
Jα
⊥· T⊥ = Jα· T− Jα
∥· T∥ = N(Rα− ρα cos θ) (26)
With this new set of order parameters in hand, we can decouple the J from the λ− u− z−integrals.
Ω(n) =
∫ ∏
α<β
dqαβ
∫ ∏
α
dRα
∫ ∏
α
dρα
×
∫ n∏
α=1
dµ(Jα)
⟨ ∏
α
δ(T· Jα− N Rα)
⟩
T
∏
α<β
δ(Jα· Jβ− N qαβ)
∏
α
δ(Jα· Jprobe− N ρα)
×
∫ ∏
α,µ
dλα
µdˆλα
µ
2π
∫ ∏
µ
duµdˆuµ
2π
∏
α,µ
Θ
(
uµ(λα
µ− κ)
)∏
µ
exp
(
i
∑
α
λα
µˆλα
µ + iuµˆuµ
)
×
⟨
exp
[
− 1
2
∑
αβ
ˆλα
µˆλβ
µ(qαβ− ραρβ)−
∑
α
ˆλα
µ ˆuµ(Rα− ρα cos θ)− 1
2 ˆu2
µ sin2 θ
− i
(∑
α
ˆλα
µρα + ˆuµ cos θ
)
zµ
]⟩
zµ
(27)
We can now perform the gaussian integral over ˆuµ,
Ω(n) =
∫ ∏
α<β
dqαβ
∫ ∏
α
dRα
∫ ∏
α
dρα
×
∫ n∏
α=1
dµ(Jα)
⟨ ∏
α
δ(T· Jα− N Rα)
⟩
T
∏
α<β
δ(Jα· Jβ− N qαβ)
∏
α
δ(Jα· Jprobe− N ρα)
×
∫ ∏
α,µ
dλα
µdˆλα
µ
2π
∫ ∏
µ
duµdˆuµ
2π
∏
α,µ
Θ
(
uµ(λα
µ− κ)
)∏
µ
exp
(
i
∑
α
λα
µˆλα
µ
)
×
⟨
exp
[
− 1
2
∑
αβ
ˆλα
µˆλβ
µ(qαβ− ραρβ)− i
∑
α
ˆλα
µραzµ
+ 1
2 sin2 θ
(
i(uµ− zµ cos θ)−
∑
α
ˆλα
µ(Rα− ρα cos θ)
)2]⟩
zµ
(28)
Expanding,
18
Ω(n) =
∫ ∏
α<β
dqαβ
∫ ∏
α
dRα
∫ ∏
α
dρα
×
∫ n∏
α=1
dµ(Jα)
⟨ ∏
α
δ(T· Jα− N Rα)
⟩
T
∏
α<β
δ(Jα· Jβ− N qαβ)
∏
α
δ(Jα· Jprobe− N ρα)
×
∫ ∏
α,µ
dλα
µdˆλα
µ
2π
∫ ∏
µ
duµdˆuµ
2π
∏
α,µ
Θ
(
uµ(λα
µ− κ)
)∏
µ
exp
(
i
∑
α
λα
µˆλα
µ− 1
2
(uµ− zµ cos θ)2
sin2 θ
)
×
⟨
exp
[
− 1
2
∑
αβ
ˆλα
µˆλβ
µ(qαβ− ραρβ)− i
∑
α
ˆλα
µραzµ
− i
sin2 θ
(
uµ− zµ cos θ)
∑
α
ˆλα
µ(Rα− ρα cos θ) + 1
2 sin2 θ
∑
αβ
ˆλα
µˆλβ
µ(Rα− ρα cos θ)(Rβ− ρβ cos θ)
]⟩
zµ
(29)
Simplifying,
Ω(n) =
∫ ∏
α<β
dqαβ
∫ ∏
α
dRα
∫ ∏
α
dρα
×
∫ n∏
α=1
dµ(Jα)
⟨ ∏
α
δ(T· Jα− N Rα)
⟩
T
∏
α<β
δ(Jα· Jβ− N qαβ)
∏
α
δ(Jα· Jprobe− N ρα)
×
∫ ∏
α,µ
dλα
µdˆλα
µ
2π
∫ ∏
µ
duµdˆuµ
2π
∏
α,µ
Θ
(
uµ(λα
µ− κ)
)
exp
(
i
∑
µ,α
λα
µˆλα
µ− 1
2
(uµ− zµ cos θ)2
sin2 θ
)
×
⟨
exp
[
− 1
2
∑
µ
∑
αβ
ˆλα
µˆλβ
µ
(
qαβ− ραρβ− (Rα− ρα cos θ)(Rβ− ρβ cos θ)
sin2 θ
)
− i
∑
µ
∑
α
ˆλα
µραzµ
− i
sin2 θ
(
uµ− zµ cos θ)
∑
α
ˆλα
µ(Rα− ρα cos θ)
]⟩
zµ
(30)
Now we introduce integral representations for the remaining delta functions, including the measure
dµ(Jα), for which we introduce the parameter ˆkα,
19
Ω(n) =
∫ ∏
α
dˆkα
4π
∫ ∏
α<β
dqαβdˆqαβ
2π/N
∫ ∏
α
dRαd ˆRα
2π/N
∫ ∏
α
dραdˆρα
2π/N
× exp
(
i N
2
∑
α
ˆkα + iN
∑
α<β
qαβ ˆqαβ + iN
∑
α
Rα ˆRα + iN
∑
α
ρα ˆρα
)
×
∫ ∏
i,α
dJα
i√
2πe exp
(
− i
2
∑
α
ˆkα∥Jα∥2− i
∑
α<β
ˆqαβJα· Jβ− i
∑
α
ˆRαJα· T− i
∑
α
ˆραJα· Jprobe
)
×
∫ ∏
α,µ
dλα
µdˆλα
µ
2π
∫ ∏
µ
duµdˆuµ
2π
∏
α,µ
Θ
(
uµ(λα
µ− κ)
)
exp
(
i
∑
µ,α
λα
µˆλα
µ− 1
2
(uµ− zµ cos θ)2
sin2 θ
)
×
⟨
exp
[
− 1
2
∑
µ
∑
αβ
ˆλα
µˆλβ
µ
(
qαβ− ραρβ− (Rα− ρα cos θ)(Rβ− ρβ cos θ)
sin2 θ
)
− i
∑
µ
∑
α
ˆλα
µραzµ
− i
sin2 θ
(
uµ− zµ cos θ)
∑
α
ˆλα
µ(Rα− ρα cos θ)
]⟩
zµ
(31)
Notice that the uµ− λα
µ− ˆλα
µ− zµ-integrals factorize in µ, and can be written as a single integral to
the power of P = αN.
Ω(n) = k
∫ ∏
α
dˆkα
4π
∫ ∏
α<β
dqαβdˆqαβ
2π/N
∫ ∏
α
dRαd ˆRα
2π/N
∫ ∏
α
dραdˆρα
2π/N
× exp
(
N
[i
2
∑
α
ˆkα + i
∑
α<β
qαβ ˆqαβ + i
∑
α
Rα ˆRα + i
∑
α
ρα ˆρα
+ GS(ˆkα, ˆqαβ, ˆRα, ˆρα) + αGE(qαβ, Rα, ρα)
])
(32)
Where we have written the Gardner volume in terms of an entropic part GS, which measures how
many spherical couplings satisfy the constraints,
GS = 1
N log
∫ ∏
α
dJα
√
2πe exp
(
− i
2
∑
α
ˆkα∥Jα∥2−i
∑
α<β
ˆqαβJα·Jβ−i
∑
α
ˆRαJα·T−i
∑
α
ˆραJα·Jprobe
)
(33)
And an energetic part GE,
GE = log
∫ du√
2π
∫ ∏
α
dλαdˆλα
2π
∏
α
Θ
(
u(λα− κ)
)
exp
(
i
∑
α
λαˆλα− 1
2
(uµ− zµ cos θ)2
sin2 θ
)
×
⟨
exp
[
− 1
2
∑
αβ
ˆλαˆλβ
(
qαβ− ραρβ− (Rα− ρα cos θ)(Rβ− ρβ cos θ)
sin2 θ
)
− i
∑
α
ˆλαραz
− i
sin2 θ
(
u− z cos θ)
∑
α
ˆλα(Rα− ρα cos θ)
]⟩
z
(34)
We ﬁrst evaluate the entropic part,GS, by introducing the n× n matrices A, B,
Aαβ = iˆkαδαβ + iˆqαβ(1− δαβ) (35)
Bαβ = δαβ + qαβ(1− δαβ) (36)
20
Inserting this our expression for GS becomes
GS = 1
N log
∫ ∏
α
dJα
√
2πe exp
(
− 1
2
∑
α,β
JαT AαβJβ− i
∑
α
Jα· (T ˆRα + Jprobe ˆρα)
)
(37)
Integrating over Jα,
GS =− n
2− 1
2 log(det A)− 1
2N
∑
α,β
(T ˆRα + Jprobe ˆρα)T A−1
αβ(T ˆRβ + Jprobe ˆρβ) (38)
Now we can include the remaining terms in the expression for Ω(n) outside of GE and GS by noting
that
tr(AB) =
∑
αβ
AαβBβα (39)
=
∑
αβ
(iˆkαδαβ + iˆqαβ(1− δαβ))(δαβ + qαβ(1− δαβ)) (40)
=
∑
α
iˆkα + 2
∑
α<β
iqαβ ˆqαβ (41)
Additionally, we can use log detA = tr(log A). Thus all terms in the exponent except GE can be
written as
− n
2−1
2 tr(log A)− 1
2N
∑
α,β
(T ˆRα+Jprobe ˆρα)T A−1
αβ(T ˆRβ+Jprobe ˆρβ)+1
2 tr(AB)+i
∑
α
Rα ˆRα+i
∑
α
ρα ˆραJprobe
(42)
Now we extremize wrt ˆRα and the elements of A by setting the derivatives wrt ˆRγ, ˆργ and Aγδ equal
to zero:
0 =−
∑
α
A−1
αγ T· (T ˆRα + Jprobe ˆρα) + iRγ =−
∑
α
A−1
αγ( ˆRα + ˆρα cos θ) + iRγ (43)
0 =−
∑
α
A−1
αγ Jprobe· (T ˆRα + Jprobe ˆρα) + iργ =−
∑
α
A−1
αγ( ˆRα cos θ + ˆρα) + iργ (44)
0 =−1
2 A−1
γδ + 1
2
∑
α,β
(T ˆRα + Jprobe ˆρα)T A−1
αγ A−1
βδ (T ˆRβ + Jprobe ˆρβ) + 1
2 Bγδ (45)
Solving these gives
ˆRα = i
∑
β
Aαβ
Rβ− ρβ cos θ
sin2 θ (46)
ˆρα = i
∑
β
Aαβ
ρβ− Rβ cos θ
sin2 θ (47)
and
A−1
γδ = Bγδ− RγRδ− Rγρδ cos θ− Rδργ cos θ + ργρδ
sin2 θ ≡ Cγδ (48)
and now we are left with
Ω(n)∼ exp
(
Nextrqαβ,Rα,ρα
[1
2 tr(log C) + αGE(qαβ, Rα)
])
(49)
21
A.3.1 Replica symmetry ansatz
In order to extremize wrt qαβ, Rα, ρα, we take the replica symmetry ansatz [26],
qαβ = q, R α = R, ρ α = ρ (50)
Then C takes the form
Cαβ = δαβ− R2− 2Rρ cos θ + ρ2
sin2 θ + q(1− δαβ) (51)
A matrix with E on the diagonal and F elsewhere, Cαβ = Eδαβ + F (1− δαβ), has n− 1 degenerate
eigenvalues E− F and one eigenvalue E + (n− 1)F . Hence in our case C has n− 1 degenerate
eigenvalues
(
1− R2− 2Rρ cos θ + ρ2
sin2 θ
)
−
(
q− R2− 2Rρ cos θ + ρ2
sin2 θ
)
= 1− q (52)
and one other eigenvalue,
(
1− R2− 2Rρ cos θ + ρ2
sin2 θ
)
+(n−1)
(
q− R2− 2Rρ cos θ + ρ2
sin2 θ
)
= 1−q+n
(
q− R2− 2Rρ cos θ + ρ2
sin2 θ
)
(53)
Therefore,
tr(log C) = (n− 1) log
(
1− q
)
+ log
[
1− q + n
(
q− R2− 2Rρ cos θ + ρ2
sin2 θ
)]
= n log
(
1− q
)
+ log
[
1 + n
(q sin2 θ− (R2− 2Rρ cos θ + ρ2)
(1− q) sin2 θ
)] (54)
We next evaluate the energetic part,GE,
GE = log
∫ du√
2π
∫ ∏
α
dλαdˆλα
2π
∏
α
Θ
(
u(λα− κ)
)
exp
(
i
∑
α
λαˆλα− 1
2
(u− z cos θ)2
sin2 θ
)
×
⟨
exp
[
− 1
2
∑
α
(ˆλα)2
(
1− ρ2− (R− ρ cos θ)2
sin2 θ
)
− 1
2
∑
α̸=β
ˆλαˆλβ
(
q− ρ2− (R− ρ cos θ)2
sin2 θ
)
− i
∑
α
ˆλαραz− i
sin2 θ
(
u− z cos θ)
∑
α
ˆλα(Rα− ρα cos θ)
]⟩
z
(55)
First note that we can rewrite the terms
− 1
2
∑
α
(
1− ρ2− (R− ρ cos θ)
sin2 θ
)
(ˆλα)2− 1
2
∑
α̸=β
ˆλαˆλβ
(
q− ρ2− (R− ρ cos θ)2
sin2 θ
)
=−1
2
∑
α
(
1− ρ2− (R− ρ cos θ)2
sin2 θ
)
(ˆλα)2− 1
2
(
q− ρ2− (R− ρ cos θ)2
sin2 θ
)[
(
∑
α
ˆλα)2−
∑
α
(ˆλα)2
]
=−1
2
∑
α
(1− q)(ˆλα)2− 1
2
(
q− ρ2− (R− ρ cos θ)2
sin2 θ
)
(
∑
α
ˆλα)2
(56)
22
To simplify the last term we apply the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, eb2/2 =
∫
Dtebt,
introducing auxiliary ﬁeldt,
= log
∫ du√
2π
∫ ∏
α
dλαdˆλα
2π
∏
α
Θ
(
u(λα− κ)
)∫
Dt
⟨
exp
[
− 1− q
2
∑
α
(ˆλα)2
+i
∑
α
ˆλα
(
λα−ραz−
(
u− z cos θ)(Rα− ρα cos θ)
sin2 θ −
√
q− ρ2− (R− ρ cos θ)2
sin2 θ t
)
−1
2
(u− z cos θ)2
sin2 θ
]⟩
z
(57)
Using the Θ-function to restrict the bounds of integration,
= log 2
∫ ∞
0
du√
2π
∫ ∞
κ
∏
α
dλα
√
2π
∫ ∏
α
dˆλα
√
2π
∫
Dt
⟨
exp
[
− 1− q
2
∑
α
(ˆλα)2
+i
∑
α
ˆλα
(
λα−ραz−
(
u− z cos θ)(Rα− ρα cos θ)
sin2 θ −
√
q− ρ2− (R− ρ cos θ)2
sin2 θ t
)
−1
2
(u− z cos θ)2
sin2 θ
]⟩
z
(58)
Now we can perform the gaussian integrals over ˆλα,
= log 2
∫ ∞
0
du√
2π
∫ ∞
κ
∏
α
dλα
√
2π
∫
Dt
⟨
exp
[
− 1
2(1− q)
(
λα− ραz
−
(
u− z cos θ)(Rα− ρα cos θ)
sin2 θ −
√
q− ρ2− (R− ρ cos θ)2
sin2 θ t
)2
− 1
2
(u− z cos θ)2
sin2 θ
]⟩
z
(59)
And λα,
= log 2
∫ ∞
0
du√
2π
∫
Dt
⟨
Hn
[
− 1√1− q
(
κ−ραz+
(
u− z cos θ)(Rα− ρα cos θ)
sin2 θ +
√
q− ρ2− (R− ρ cos θ)2
sin2 θ t
)2]
× exp
[
− 1
2
(u− z cos θ)2
sin2 θ
]⟩
z
(60)
Shifting the integration variablet→ (ραz+ (u−z cosθ)(Rα−ρα cosθ)
sin2θ +
√
q− ρ2− (R−ρ cosθ)2
sin2θ t)/√q,
we can ﬁnally perform the gaussian integral overu,
= log 2
∫ dt√
2π
⟨
exp
(
− (√qt− zρ)2
2(q− ρ)2
)√ q
q− ρ2 Hn
(
−
√ q
1− q t
)
× H
( 1√
q− ρ2
κ− (qR0z + zρ(R− 2ρ cos θ)−√qt(R− ρ cos θ))√
q sin2 θ + 2Rρ cos θ− R2− ρ
)⟩
z
(61)
We can simplify this further by taking t→ (√qt− zρ)/
√
q− ρ2,
= log 2
∫
Dt
⟨
Hn
(κ− (zρ +
√
q− ρ2)t√1− q
)
H
(t
(√
q− ρ2 + ρz
)
(R− ρ cos θ) + qz cos θ− ρRz
√
− (q− ρ2)
(
ρ2− q sin2 θ + R2− 2ρR cos θ
)
)⟩
z
(62)
23
A.4 Quenched entropy
Putting everything together, and using the replica identity,⟨log Ω⟩=limn→0(⟨Ωn⟩− 1)/n, we obtain
an expression for the quenched entropy of the teacher-student perceptron under data pruning:
1
N⟨log Ω⟩ = extrq,R,ρ
[1
2 log
(
1− q
)
+ 1
2
(q− (R2− 2Rρ cos θ + ρ2)/ sin2 θ
1− q
)
+ 2α
⟨ ∫
Dt log H
(κ− (zρ +
√
q− ρ2)t√1− q
)
× H
(t
(√
q− ρ2 + ρz
)
(R− ρ cos θ) + z(q cos θ− ρR)
√
(q− ρ2)
(
R2 + ρ2− q sin2 θ− 2ρR cos θ
)
)⟩
z
]
(63)
We will now unpack this equation and use it to make predictions in several speciﬁc settings.
A.5 Perfect teacher-probe overlap
We will begin by considering the case where the probe student has learned to perfectly match the
teacher, Jprobe = T , which we can obtain by the limit θ→ 0, ρ→ R. In this limit the second
H-function in Eq. 63 becomes increasingly sharp, approaching a step function:
H
(t
(√
q− ρ2 + ρz
)
(R− ρ cos θ) + z(q cos θ− ρR)
√
(q− ρ2)
(
R2 + ρ2− q sin2 θ− 2ρR cos θ
)
)
→ Θ(z) (64)
Hence we are left with,
1
N⟨⟨ln Ω(xµ, T, κ)⟩⟩ = extrq,R
[1
2 log
(
1− q
)
+ 1
2
(q− R2
1− q
)
+ 2α
∫
Dt
∫
dzp(z)Θ(z) logH
(
−
√
q− R2t + Rz− κ√1− q
)]
(65)
A.5.1 Saddle point equations
We can now obtain a set of self-consistent saddle point equations by setting set to zero the derivatives
with respect to R and q of the right side of Eq. 65. As κ approaches its critical value, the space of
solutions shrinks to a unique solution, and hence the overlap between students q approaches one. In
the limit q→ 1, after some partial integration, we ﬁnd,
R = 2α
∫ κ
−∞
dt√
2π
√
1− R2
∫ ∞
0
dzp(z) exp
(
− (t− Rz)2
2(1− R2)
)(z− Rt
1− R2
)
(κ− t) (66)
1− R2 = 2α
∫ κ
−∞
dt√
2π
√
1− R2
∫ ∞
0
dzp(z) exp
(
− (t− Rz)2
2(1− R2)
)(
κ− t
)2
(67)
These saddle point equations can be solved numerically to ﬁnd R and κ as a function of α for a
student perceptron trained on a dataset with an arbitrary distribution along the teacher direction p(z).
We can specialize to the case of data pruning by setting p(z) to the distribution found after pruning
an initially Gaussian-distributed dataset so that only a fraction f of those examples with the smallest
margin along the teacher are kept, p(z) = e−z2/2
√
2πf Θ(γ−| z|), where the threshold γ = H−1(1−f
2
)
.
24
R = 2α
f
√
2π
√
1− R2
∫ κ
−∞
Dt exp
(
− R2t2
2(1− R2)
)[
1− exp
(
− γ(γ− 2Rt)
2(1− R2)
)]
(κ− t) (68)
1− R2 = 2α
f
∫ κ
−∞
Dt
[
H
(
− Rt√
1− R2
)
− H
(
− Rt− γ√
1− R2
)]
(κ− t)2 (69)
Solving these saddle point equations numerically for R and κ yields an excellent ﬁt to numerical
simulations, as can be seen in Fig. 1A. It is also easy to verify that in the limit of no data pruning
(f→ 1, γ→∞ ) we recover the saddle point equations for the classical teacher-student perceptron
(Eqs. 4.4 and 4.5 in [26]),
R = 2α√
2π
√
1− R2
∫
Dt exp
(
− R2t2
2(1− R2)
)
(κ− t) (70)
1− R2 = 2α
∫
Dt H
(
− Rt√
1− R2
)(
κ− t
)2
(71)
A.6 Information gain per example
Why does data pruning allow for super-exponential performance with dataset size α? We can
deﬁne the amount of information gained from each new example,I(α),as the fraction by which the
space of solutions which perfectly classify the data is reduced when a new training example is added,
I(α) = Ω(P+1
N )/Ω(P
N ). Or, equivalently, the rate at which the entropy is reduced,I(α) =− d
dα S(α).
Of coure, the volume of solutions shrinks to zero at the max-margin solution; so to study the volume
of solutions which perfectly classify the data we simply set the margin to zero κ = 0. In [ 32] the
information gain for a perceptron in the classical teacher-student setting is shown to take the form,
I(α) =−2
∫
Dt H
(√
R
1− R t
)
log H
(√
R
1− R t
)
(72)
Which goes to zero in the limit of large α as I(α)∼ 1/α. Data pruning can increase the information
gained per example by pruning away the uninformative examples. To show this, we generalize
the calculation of the information gain to pruned datasets, using the expression for the entropy we
obtained in the previous section (Eq. 65).
S(α) = 1
N⟨log Ω⟩ = extrq,R
[1
2 log
(
1−R
)
+1
2 R+2α
∫
Dt
∫ ∞
0
dz p(z) logH
(
−
√
Rt− R√
1− R z
)]
(73)
Hence the information gain I(α) =− d
dα S(α) is given by
I(α) = 2α
∫
Dt
∫
dzp(z)Θ(z) logH
(
−
√
Rt− R√
1− R z
)
(74)
Changing variables to t→− (
√
Rt + R√1−R z)/√q,
I(α) = 2α
∫
Dt
∫ ∞
0
dzp(z) 1√
1− R
1√
2π exp
(
− z2 + 2
√
Rtz
2(1− R)
)
log H
(√
R
1− R t
)
(75)
Now, assuming that we prune to a fraction f, so that p(z) = Θ
(
|z|− γ
)exp(−z2/2)√
2πf , where γ =
H−1
(
1−f
2
)
I(α) = 2α
f
∫
Dt
[
H
(√
R
1− R t
)
− H
(γ +
√
Rt√
1− R
)]
log H
(√
R
1− R t
)]
(76)
25
I(α) is plotted for varying values of f in Fig. 1F. Notice that for f→ 1, γ→∞ and we recover Eq.
72. To obtain the optimal pruning fraction fopt for any α, we ﬁrst need an equation forR, which can
be obtained by taking the saddle point of Eq. 73. Next we optimize I(α) by setting the derivative
of Eq. 76 with respect to f equal to zero. This gives us a pair of equations which can be solved
numerically to obtain fopt for any α.
Finally, Eq. 76 reveals that as we prune more aggressively the information gain per example
approaches a ﬁnite rate. As f→ 0, γ→ 0, and we obtain,
I(α) =−
∫
Dt log H(
√
Rt) (77)
Which allows us to produce to trace the Pareto frontier in Fig. 1 F. For R→ 1, Eq. 77 gives the
asymptotic information gain I(∞) = 1 nat/example.
A.7 Imperfect teacher-probe overlap
In realistic settings we expect the probe student to have only partial information about the target
function. What happens if the probe student does not perfectly match the teacher? To understand this
carefully, we need to compute the full set of saddle point equations over R, q, and ρ, which we will
do in the following section. But to ﬁrst get an idea for what goes wrong, we include in this section a
simple sketch which reveals the limiting behavior.
Consider the case where the angle between the probe student and teacher is θ. Rotate coordinates so
that the ﬁrst canonical basis vector aligns with the studentJ = (1, 0, . . . ,0), and the teacher lies in
the span of the ﬁrst two canonical basis vectors, T = (cos θ, sin θ, 0, . . . ,0). Consider the margin
along the teacher of a new training example x drawn from the pruned distribution.
E|T· x|2 = E[x2
0 cos2 θ + x2
1 sin2 θ] (78)
As the fraction of examples kept goes to zero, Ex2
0→ 0, and the average margin of a new example
converges to a ﬁxed value,
E|T· x|2 = sin2 θ (79)
Hence the data ultimately stops concentrating around the teacher’s decision boundary, and the
information gained from each new example goes to zero. Therefore we expect the generalization
error to converge to a power law, where the constant prefactor is roughly that of pruning with a prune
fraction fmin which yields an average margin of 1− R2. This “minimum” pruning fraction lower
bounds the generalization error envelope (see Fig. 2), and satisﬁes the following equation,
∫ γmin
−γmin
dxp(x)x2 = 1
2− e−γ2
min/2γmin√
2π(1− 2H(γmin)) = 1− R2 (80)
where γmin = H−1
(
1−fmin
2
)
. Eq. 80 can be solved numerically, and we use it to produce the
lower-bounding power laws shown in red in Fig. 2C,D. The minimum achievable pruning fraction
fmin(θ) approaches zero as the angle between the probe student and the teacher shrinks, and we can
obtain its scaling by taking R→ 1, in which case we ﬁnd,
fmin(θ)∼ θ (81)
A.8 Optimal pruning policy
The saddle point equations Eq. 66,67 reveal that the optimal pruning policy varies as a function of
αprune. For αprune large the best policy is to retain only the “hardest" (smallest-margin) examples. But
when αprune is small, keeping the “hardest" examples performs worse than chance, suggesting that the
best policy in the αprune small regime is to keep the easiest examples. Indeed by switching between
26
the “keep easy” and “keep hard” strategies as αprune grows, one can achieve a lower Pareto frontier
than the one shown in Fig. 1A in the small αprune regime (Fig. 7C).
Optimal data distributionA
Optimal pruning window
Keep easy
Optimal
policy
Pareto
frontier
B
C
Test error (%)
Figure 7: Optimal pruning policy as a function of αprune. A, The Pareto frontier in Fig. AA can be
lowered in the small αprune regime if one adaptively switches pruning policies from a “keep easy”
to a “keep hard” policy. The dashed purple line indicates the “keep easy” frontier (computed using
numerical simulations). The optimal pruning window (derived below) interpolates between the two
policies, achieving the lowest possible Pareto frontier (cartooned in blue). B, The optimal data
distribution along the teacher p(z|αprune, f) is a delta function, which selects easy examples for small
αprune, intermediate examples for intermediate αprune, and hard examples for large αprune. C, The
optimal pruning window similarly selects easy examples for small αprune, intermediate examples for
intermediate αprune, and hard examples for large αprune
These observations beg the question: what is the best policy in the intermediate αprune regime? Is
there a globally optimal pruning policy which interpolates between the “keep easy” and “keep hard”
strategies and achieves the lowest possible Pareto frontier (blue curve in Fig. 7A)?
In this section we investigate this question. Using the calculus of variations, we ﬁrst derive the
optimal data distribution p(z|αprune, f) along the teacher for a given αprune, f. We begin by framing
the problem using the method of Lagrange multipliers. Seeking to optimize R under the constraints
imposed by the saddle point equations Eqs. 66,67, we deﬁne the Lagrangian,
L = R + µ
(
R− 2α
∫ ∞
0
dz p(z)ϕ(z; R, k)
)
+ λ
(
1− R2− 2α
∫ ∞
0
dz p(z)ψ(z; R, k)
)
. (82)
Where,
ϕ(z; R, k) =
∫ κ
−∞
dt√
2π
√
1− R2 exp
(
− (t− Rz)2
2(1− R2)
)(z− Rt
1− R2
)
(κ− t), (83)
and,
ψ(z; R, k) =
∫ κ
−∞
dt√
2π
√
1− R2 exp
(
− (t− Rz)2
2(1− R2)
)(
κ− t
)2
(84)
Taking a variational derivativeδL
δp with respect to the data distribution p, we obtain an equation for
z, indicating that the optimal distribution is a delta function at z = z∗. To ﬁnd the optimal location
of the delta function z∗, we take derivatives with respect to the remaining variables R, k, µ, λ and
solve the resulting set of equations numerically. The qualitative behavior is shown in Fig. 7A. As
αprune grows, the location of the delta function shifts from inﬁnity to zero, conﬁrming that the optimal
strategy for small αprune is to keep the "easy" (large-margin) examples, and for large αprune to keep
the "hard" (small-margin) examples.
Interestingly, this calculation also reveals that if the location of the delta function is chosen optimally,
the student can perfectly recover the teacher (R = 1, zero generalization error) for any αprune. This
27
observation, while interesting, is of no practical consequence because it relies on an inﬁnitely large
training set from which examples can be precisely selected to perfectly recover the teacher. Therefore,
to derive the optimal pruning policy for a more realistic scenario, we assume a gaussian distribution
of data along the teacher direction and model pruning as keeping only those examples which fall
inside a window a < z < b . The saddle point equations, Eqs. 66,67, then take the form,
R = 2α
f
√
π/2
√
1− R2
∫ κ
−∞
Dt
[
exp
(
− (a− Rt)2
2(1− R2)
)
− exp
(
− (b− Rt)2
2(1− R2)
)]
(κ− t) (85)
1− R2 = 4α
f
∫ κ
−∞
Dt
[
H
( a− Rt√
1− R2
)
− H
( b− Rt√
1− R2
)]
(κ− t)2 (86)
Where a must satisfy a = H−1(f /2 + H(b)). For each f, α, we ﬁnd the optimal location of this
window using the method of Lagrange multipliers. Deﬁning the Lagrangian as before,
L = R + µ
(
R− 2α
∫ ∞
0
dz p(z)ϕ(z; R, k)
)
+ λ
(
1− R2− 2α
∫ ∞
0
dz p(z)ψ(z; R, k)
)
, (87)
Where now,
φ(b; R, k) =
[
exp
(
− (a− Rt)2
2(1− R2)
)
− exp
(
− (b− Rt)2
2(1− R2)
)]
(κ− t) (88)
ψ(b; R, k) =
[
H
( a− Rt√
1− R2
)
− H
( b− Rt√
1− R2
)]
(κ− t)2 (89)
To ﬁnd the optimal location of the pruning window, we take derivatives with respect to the remaining
variables b, R, k, µ, λ and solve the resulting set of equations numerically. Consistent with the results
for the optimal distribution, the location of the optimal window shifts from around inﬁnity to around
zero as αprune grows (Fig. 7C).
A.9 Exact saddle point equations
To obtain exact expressions for the generalization error for all θ, we can extremize Eq. 63 wrt R, q, ρ.
Derivative wrt R
R− ρ cos θ
(1− q) sin2 θ =
∫
dt
∫
dz p(z)
√
2α
π
( t
√
q− ρ2
√
2
√
(ρ2− q)Λ
− (R− ρ cos θ)Γ(t, z)√
2
√
q− ρ2Λ3
)
(90)
× log
(
H
(
κ− t
√
q− ρ2− ρz√1− q
))
exp
(
− Γ(t, z)2
2 (q− ρ2) Λ2− t2
2
)
(91)
Where we have deﬁned,
Λ =
√
q sin2 θ− R2− ρ2 + 2Rρ cos θ, (92)
Γ(t, z) = (R− ρ cos θ)
(
t
√
q− ρ2 + ρz
)
+ qz cos θ− ρRz. (93)
Integrating the right-hand side by parts,
R− ρ cos θ
(1− q) sin2 θ =−
∫
dt
∫
dz p(z) α
πΛ
√
q− ρ2e−(κ−t
√
q−ρ2 −ρz)
2
2(1−q)
√
2π√1− qH
(
κ−t
√
q−ρ2−ρz√1−q
) exp
(
−∆(t, z)
2Λ2
)
(94)
28
where
∆(t, z) = 2tz
√
q− ρ2(R−ρ cos θ) cosθ+qt2 sin2 θ+qz2 cos2 θ−ρ2t2 sin2 θ−ρ2z2 cos2 θ (95)
Changing variables to t→ t
√
q− ρ2 + ρz and taking the limit q→ 1,
R− ρ cos θ
sin2 θ =
⟨ ∫ κ
−∞
dt α
πΛ exp
(
−∆(t, z)
2Λ2
)
(κ− t)
⟩
z
(96)
Where with this change of variables,
Λ =
√
q sin2 θ− R2− ρ2 + 2ρR cos θ (97)
∆(t, z) = z2 (
ρ2 + cos2 θ− 2ρR cos θ
)
+ 2tz(R cos θ− ρ) + t2 sin2 θ (98)
Derivative wrt q,
q− (ρ2 + R2− 2ρR cos θ)/ sin2 θ
2(1− q)2 =
∫
dt
∫
dz p(z)2α
π
(
κ− t
√
q− ρ2− ρz
(1− q)3/2 − t√1− q
√
q− ρ2
)
(99)
× exp

−
(
κ− t
√
q− ρ2− ρz
)2
2(1− q) − t2
2

 (100)
×H

−
(R− ρ cos θ)
(
t
√
q− ρ2 + ρz
)
+ qz cos θ− ρRz
√
(ρ2− q)
(
ρ2− q sin2 θ + R2− 2ρR cos θ
)

 H
(
κ− t
√
q− ρ2− ρz√1− q
)
(101)
−
√
2α
π
(t(R−ρ cosθ)
2
√
q−ρ2 + z cos
√
2
√
(q− ρ2)Λ
−
((
q− ρ2)
sin2 θ + Λ2)
Γ(t, z)
2
√
2 (ρ2− q)3/2 Λ3
)
(102)
× log
(
H
(
κ− t
√
q− ρ2− ρz√1− q
))
exp

−
(
(R− ρ cos θ)
(
t
√
q− ρ2 + ρz
)
+ qz cos θ− ρRz
)2
2 (q− ρ2) Λ2 − t2
2


(103)
Where Γ(t, z) = (R− ρ cos θ)
(
t
√
q− ρ2 + ρz
)
+ qz cos θ− ρRz. After integating by parts,
q− (ρ2 + R2− 2ρR cos θ)/ sin2 θ
2(1− q)2 =
∫
dt
∫
dz p(z)
α exp
(
−
2t
√
q−ρ2(ρz−κ)−(ρ2−1)t2+(κ−ρz)2
2(1−q)
)
4πH
(
κ−t
√
q−ρ2−ρz√1−q
)2
(104)
×
√
2
π e−(κ−t
√
q−ρ2 −ρz)
2
2(1−q) H
(
− Γ(t, z)√
(q− ρ2) Λ
)
(105)
29
Changing variables to t→ t
√
q− ρ2 + ρz and taking the limit q→ 1,
1− ρ2 + R2− 2ρR cos θ
sin2 θ = 2α
⟨ ∫ κ
−∞
dt e
− (t−ρz)2
2(1−ρ2 )
√
2π
√
1− ρ2 H
( Γ(t, z)√
1− ρ2Λ
)
(κ− t)2
⟩
z
(106)
Where now Γ(t, z) = z(ρR− cos θ)− t(R− ρ cos θ).
Derivative wrt ρ,
ρ− R cos θ
(1− q) sin2 θ = α
2π
(
ρt√
q−ρ2− z
)
exp
(
−
(
κ−t
√
q−ρ2−ρz
)2
2(1−q) − t2
2
)
H
(
− Γ(t,z)√
q−ρ2Λ
)
√1− qH
(
κ−t
√
q−ρ2−ρz√1−q
) (107)
+
√
2α
π
((R− ρ cos θ)
(
z− ρt√
q−ρ2
)
−
(
t
√
q− ρ2 + ρz
)
cos θ− Rz
√
2
√
q− ρ2Λ
(108)
−
(
−2ρΛ2−
(
q− ρ2)
(2ρ− 2R cos θ)
)
Γ(t, z)
2
√
2 (q− ρ2)3/2 Λ3
)
(109)
× log
(
1
2erfc
(
κ− t
√
q− ρ2− ρz√
2√1− q
))
exp
(
− Γ(t, z)2
2 (q− ρ2) Λ2− t2
2
)
(110)
Integrating the second term by parts,
ρ− R cos θ
(1− q) sin2 θ = α
π
(
ρt√
q−ρ2− z
)
exp
(
−
(
κ−t
√
q−ρ2−ρz
)2
2(1−q) − t2
2
)
H
(
− Γ(t,z)√
q−ρ2Λ
)
√1− qH
(
κ−t
√
q−ρ2−ρz√1−q
) (111)
− α
π∆ exp
(
−∆(t, z)
2Λ2
) (ρR− q cos θ
q− ρ2
)
(112)
Changing variables to t→ t
√
q− ρ2 + ρz and taking the limit q→ 1,
ρ− R cos θ
sin2 θ = 2α
⟨ ∫ κ
−∞
dt e
− (t−ρz)2
2(1−ρ2 )
√
2π
√
1− ρ2 H
( Γ(t, z)√
1− ρ2Λ
)(z− ρt
1− ρ2
)
(κ− t) (113)
+ 1
2πΛ exp
(
−∆(t, z)
2Λ2
) (ρR− cos θ
1− ρ2
)
(κ− t)
⟩
z
(114)
So together we have three saddle point equations:
30
R− ρ cos θ
sin2 θ = α
πΛ
⟨ ∫ κ
−∞
dt exp
(
−∆(t, z)
2Λ2
)
(κ− t)
⟩
z
(115)
1− ρ2 + R2− 2ρR cos θ
sin2 θ = 2α
⟨ ∫ κ
−∞
dt e
− (t−ρz)2
2(1−ρ2 )
√
2π
√
1− ρ2 H
( Γ(t, z)√
1− ρ2Λ
)
(κ− t)2
⟩
z
(116)
ρ− R cos θ
sin2 θ = 2α
⟨ ∫ κ
−∞
dt e
− (t−ρz)2
2(1−ρ2 )
√
2π
√
1− ρ2 H
( Γ(t, z)√
1− ρ2Λ
)(z− ρt
1− ρ2
)
(κ− t)
(117)
+ 1
2πΛ exp
(
−∆(t, z)
2Λ2
) (ρR− cos θ
1− ρ2
)
(κ− t)
⟩
z
(118)
Where
Λ =
√
sin2 θ− R2− ρ2 + 2ρR cos θ, (119)
Γ(t, z) = z(ρR− cos θ)− t(R− ρ cos θ), (120)
∆(t, z) = z2 (
ρ2 + cos2 θ− 2ρR cos θ
)
+ 2tz(R cos θ− ρ) + t2 sin2 θ. (121)
Solving these equations numerically yields an excellent ﬁt to numerical simulations on structured
data (Fig. 2BCD).
B Model training method details & dataset information
Perceptron in the teacher-student setting All code to reproduce these simulations can be found at:
https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1in35C6jh7y_ynwuWLBmGOWAgmUgpl8dF?
usp=sharing. Perceptrons were trained on a synthetic dataset of P examples{xµ, yµ}µ=1,...,P ,
where xµ∼N (0, IN) are i.i.d. zero mean unit variance random Gaussian inputs, andyµ = sign(T·x)
are labels generated by a teacher perceptron T∈ RN , which was randomly drawn from a uniform
distribution on the sphere T∼ Unif(SN−1(
√
N)). For all of our experiments we ﬁxedN = 200 and
set P = αN where α varied between 100.1 and 100.5. Each synthetic dataset was pruned to keep a
fraction f of the smallest-margin examples, where f varied between 0.1 and 1 in Fig. 1 and between
0.2 and 1 in Figs. 2,3 to match the real-world experiments in Fig. 3. Perceptrons were optimized to
ﬁnd the max-margin separating solution using a standard quadratic programming (QP) algorithm
from the CVXPY library (for analysis of the computational complexity of this algorithm see Fig. 8).
Results were averaged over 100 independent draws of the teacher and training examples.
ImageNet. ImageNet model training was performed using a standard ResNet-50 through the VISSL
library [41] (stable version v0.1.6), which provides default conﬁguration ﬁles for supervised ResNet-
50 training (accessible here; released under the MIT license). Each model was trained on a single
node of 8 NVIDIA V100 32GB graphics cards with BATCHSIZE_PER_REPLICA = 256, using the
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) optimizer with a base learning rate = 0.1, nesterov momentum
= 0.9, and weight decay = 0.001. For our scaling experiments (Fig. 3 and Fig. 9), we trained one
model per fraction of data kept (0.1-1.0) for each dataset size. In total, these plot required training 97
models on (potentially a subset of) ImageNet. All the models were trained with matched number of
iterations, corresponding to 105 epochs on the full ImageNet dataset. The learning rate was decayed
by a factor of 10 after the number of iterations corresponding to 30, 60, 90, and 100 epochs on the
full ImageNet dataset.
For our main ImageNet experiments (Fig. 5) we trained one model per fraction of data kept (1.0,
0.9, 0.8, 0.7, 0.6) × metric (11 metrics in total). In the plot itself, since any variation in the
“fraction of data kept = 1.0” setting is due to random variation across runs not due to potential
metric differences, we averaged model performances to obtain a single datapoint here (while also
keeping track of the variation across models, which is plotted as ±2 standard deviations). In
total, this plot required training 55 models on (potentially a subset of) ImageNet. For Fig. 5C, in
order to reduce noise from random variation, we additionally trained ﬁve models per datapoint and
metric, and plot the averaged performance in addition to error bars showing one standard deviation
31
of the mean. Numerical results from Figure 5BC are available from Table 1. ImageNet [ 42] is
released under the ImageNet terms of access. It is important to note that ImageNet images are
often biased [43, 44]. The SWaV model used to compute our prototypicality metrics was obtained
via torch.hub.load(‘facebookresearch/swav:main’, ‘resnet50’) , which is the original
model provided by [36]; we then used the avgpool layer’s activations.
Fraction of data kept
metric 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6
random 89.816 89.882 89.108 88.206
memorization 90.209 90.664 89.837 89.032
supervised prototypes 90.076 90.528 89.358 88.925
self-supervised prototypes 90.245 90.466 89.46 88.547
DDD 89.428 89.060 88.682 88.484
EL2N (1 model) 90.534 90.310 89.818 88.476
EL2N (20 models) 90.348 89.698 90.352 88.674
active learning 90.354 90.314 89.334 89.360
forgetting 90.352 90.120 89.486 89.112
inﬂuence max 90.590 89.804 88.684 88.062
inﬂuence sum-abs 89.558 90.224 88.618 88.082
Table 1: Benchmark table of pruning results (top-5 ImageNet validation accuracy) corresponding to
Figure 5BC. Values for ResNet-50 trained with VISSL (baseline unpruned top-5 accuracy: 90.848).
CIFAR-10 and SVHN. CIFAR-10 and SVHN model training was performed using a standard
ResNet-18 through the PyTorch library. Each model was trained on a single NVIDIA TITAN Xp
12GB graphics card with batch size = 128, using the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) optimizer
with learning rate = 0.1, nesterov momentum = 0.9, and weight decay = 0.0005. Probe models were
trained for 20 epochs each for CIFAR-10 and 40 epochs each for SVHN. Pruning scores were then
computed using the EL2Ns metric [10], averaged across 10 independent initializations of the probe
models. To evaluate data pruning performance, fresh models were trained from scratch on each
pruned dataset for 200 epochs, with the learning rate decayed by a factor of 5 after 60, 120 and 160
epochs.
Data pruning for transfer learning. To assess the effect of pruning downstream ﬁnetuning data
on transfer learning performance, vision transformers (ViTs) pre-trained on ImageNet21k were
ﬁne-tuned on different pruned subsets of CIFAR-10. Pre-trained models were obtained from the
timm model library [45]. Each model was trained on a single NVIDIA TITAN Xp 12GB graphics
card with batch size = 128, using the Adam optimizer with learning rate = 1e-5 and no weight decay.
Probe models were trained for 2 epochs each. Pruning scores were then computed using the EL2Ns
metric [10], averaged across 10 independent random seeds. To evaluate data pruning performance,
pre-trained models were ﬁne-tuned on each pruned dataset for 10 epochs.
To assess the effect of pruning upstream pretraining data on transfer learning performance, each
of the ResNet-50s pre-trained on pruned subsets of ImageNet1k in Fig. 3 D was ﬁne-tuned on all
of CIFAR-10. Each model was trained on a single NVIDIA TITAN Xp 12GB graphics card with
batch size = 128, using the RMSProp optimizer with learning rate = 1e-4 and no weight decay.
Probe models were trained for 2 epochs each. Pruning scores were then computed using the EL2Ns
metric [10], averaged across 10 independent random seeds. To evaluate data pruning performance,
pre-trained models were ﬁne-tuned on each pruned dataset for 10 epochs.
C Breaking compute scaling laws via data pruning
Do the savings in training dataset size we have identiﬁed translate to savings in compute, and can
data pruning be used to beat widely observed compute scaling laws [2, 5, 7]? Here we show for the
perceptron that data pruning can afford exponential savings in compute, and we provide preliminary
evidence that the same is true for ResNets trained on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. We repeat the
perceptron learning experiments in Fig. 1A, keeping track of the computational complexity of each
experiment, measured by the time to convergence of the quadratic programming algorithm used to
32
ResNet18 on CIFAR-10
Perceptron in teacher-student setting
ResNet50 on Imagenet
A B
ED
100%
Frac. data kept
77%
60%
46%
36%
28%
22%
17%
13%
10%
Test error (%)
Test error (%)
Test error (top-5 %)
Epoch Epoch
Compute (FLOPs)Compute (clock time in seconds)
ResNet18 on CIFAR-10
Pareto
frontier
20%
Frac. data kept
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Test error (%)
Compute (FLOPs)
C ResNet50 on ImageNet
Pareto
frontier
20%
Frac. data kept
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Theory
Simulation
Figure 8: Breaking compute scaling laws via data pruning. A,B,C, We repeat the experiments in
Figs. 1 A, 3C,D, replacing the x-axis with compute, measured as clock time to convergence for
the perceptron (A), and FLOPs in a ﬁxed-epoch training setting for the ResNets (B,C). Theoretical
curves in A are overlaid by linearly regressing clock time to convergence T from αprune, with
T = 0.96αprune + 0.80. Perceptrons in A are trained on a CPU on a google Colab. E,D, CIFAR-10
and ImageNet learning curves for ﬁxed epochs.
ﬁnd a max-margin solution (see B for details). Across all experiments, the convergence timeT was
linearly proportional to αprune with T = 0.96αprune + 0.80, allowing us to replace the x-axis of 1A
with compute to produce Fig. 8A, which reveals that data pruning can be used to break compute
scaling laws for the perceptron.
Motivated by this, we next investigate whether the convergence time of neural networks trained
on pruned datasets depends largely on the number of examples and not their difﬁculty, potentially
allowing for exponential compute savings. We investigate the learning curves of a ResNet18 trained
on CIFAR-10 and a ResNet50 on ImageNet for several different pruning fractions (Fig. 8B). While
previous works have ﬁxed the number of iterations [10], here we ﬁx the number ofepochs, so that the
model trained on 60% of the full dataset is trained for only 60% the iterations of the model trained
on the full dataset, using only 60% the compute. Nevertheless, we ﬁnd that the learning curves are
strikingly similar across pruning fractions, and appear to converge equally quickly. These results
suggest that data pruning could lead to large compute savings in practical settings, and in ongoing
experiments we are working to make the analogs of Fig. 8A for ResNets on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet
to quantify this beneﬁt.
D Additional scaling experiments
In Fig. 9 we perform additional scaling experiments using the EL2Ns and self-supervised prototypes
metrics. In Fig. 10 we give a practical example of a cross over from exponential to power-law scaling
when the probe student has limited information about the teacher (here a model trained for only a
small number of epochs on SVHN) .
E Extremal images according to different metrics
In Fig. 6, we showed extremal images for two metrics (self-supervised prototypes, memorization) and
a single class. In order to gain a better understanding of how extremal images (i.e. images that are
33
Pareto
frontier
Pareto
frontier Pareto
frontier
Self-supervised prototypes
(50% class balancing)EL2Ns (50% class balancing)EL2Ns (0% class balancing)
Top-5 test error (%)
Top-5 test error (%)
Top-5 test error (%)
A B C
100%
Frac. data kept
77%
60%
46%
36%
28%
22%
17%
13%
10%
100%
Frac. data kept
77%
60%
46%
36%
28%
22%
17%
13%
10%
100%
Frac. data kept
77%
60%
46%
36%
28%
22%
17%
13%
10%
Figure 9: Additional scaling experiments. We reproduce the scaling results on ImageNet in Fig. 3D
using three additional metrics: two supervised and one self-supervised. Each shows some signatures of
breaking power law scaling, although the effect is less dramatic than for the best metric, memorization
(Fig. 3D). (A) EL2Ns with a class balancing fraction of 0% (see App. Section H for details), ( B)
EL2Ns with a class balancing fraction of 50%, and ( C) Self-supervised prototypes with a class
balancing fraction of 50%.
SVHN (epoch 40)A B
Error no longer 
lower-bounded 
Error lower-bounded
by power law at 
SVHN (epoch 4)
Figure 10: Consistent with a prediction from the perceptron theory (Fig. 2), when SVHN is pruned
using a weak metric (a probe trained for only 4 epochs), the learning curve envelope is lower-bounded
by a power law at some fmin (A). However, with a stronger pruning metric (a probe trained for 40
epochs), the learning curve can break through this power law to achieve lower generalization error
(B).
easiest or hardest to learn according to different metrics) look like for all metrics and more classes,
we here provide additional ﬁgures. In order to avoid cherry-picking classes while at the same time
making sure that we are visualizing images for very different classes, we here show extreme images
for classes 100, ..., 500 while leaving out classes 0 and 400 (which would have been part of the
visualization) since those classes almost exclusively consist of images containing people (0: tench,
400: academic gown). The extremal images are shown in Figures 12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19.
34
Test error (%)
Teacher-student perceptron
Training examples
ResNet18 on SVHNBA
Figure 11: Scaling of the Pareto frontier. (A) Different functional forms ﬁtted to the Pareto frontier of
the teacher-student perceptron using least squares: power-law (blue), exponential (orange), factorial
(red), and iterated factorial (purple). (B), We estimate the empirical Pareto frontier (red) for ResNet18
on SVHN at higher resolution by training an additional 300 models in the region around the frontier.
We then ﬁt two functional forms to the empirical frontier using least squares: power-law (dark red)
and exponential (pink). The exponential shows a much better ﬁt to the empirical Pareto frontier,
indicating that the scaling is at least exponential.
35
easy
hard
random
easy
hard
influence max
easy
hard
influence sum-abs
easy
hard
self-supervised prototypes
easy
hard
supervised prototypes
easy
hard
EL2N (1 model)
Figure 12: Extreme images according to different metrics for ImageNet class 100 ( black swan ).
For each metric, the top row shows images that are ranked as “easy” (most pruneable) according to
the metric, and the bottom row shows images that are ranked as “hard” (least pruneable).
36
easy
hard
DDD
easy
hard
EL2N (20 models)
easy
hard
memorization
easy
hard
active learning
easy
hard
forgetting
Figure 13: Extreme images according to different metrics for ImageNet class 100 ( black swan ).
For each metric, the top row shows images that are ranked as “easy” (most pruneable) according to
the metric, and the bottom row shows images that are ranked as “hard” (least pruneable).
37
easy
hard
random
easy
hard
influence max
easy
hard
influence sum-abs
easy
hard
self-supervised prototypes
easy
hard
supervised prototypes
easy
hard
EL2N (1 model)
Figure 14: Extreme images according to different metrics for ImageNet class 200 ( Tibetan
terrier). For each metric, the top row shows images that are ranked as “easy” (most prune-
able) according to the metric, and the bottom row shows images that are ranked as “hard” (least
pruneable).
38
easy
hard
DDD
easy
hard
EL2N (20 models)
easy
hard
memorization
easy
hard
active learning
easy
hard
forgetting
Figure 15: Extreme images according to different metrics for ImageNet class 200 ( Tibetan
terrier). For each metric, the top row shows images that are ranked as “easy” (most prune-
able) according to the metric, and the bottom row shows images that are ranked as “hard” (least
pruneable).
39
easy
hard
random
easy
hard
influence max
easy
hard
influence sum-abs
easy
hard
self-supervised prototypes
easy
hard
supervised prototypes
easy
hard
EL2N (1 model)
Figure 16: Extreme images according to different metrics for ImageNet class 300 (tiger beetle ).
For each metric, the top row shows images that are ranked as “easy” (most pruneable) according to
the metric, and the bottom row shows images that are ranked as “hard” (least pruneable).
40
easy
hard
DDD
easy
hard
EL2N (20 models)
easy
hard
memorization
easy
hard
active learning
easy
hard
forgetting
Figure 17: Extreme images according to different metrics for ImageNet class 300 (tiger beetle ).
For each metric, the top row shows images that are ranked as “easy” (most pruneable) according to
the metric, and the bottom row shows images that are ranked as “hard” (least pruneable).
41
easy
hard
random
easy
hard
influence max
easy
hard
influence sum-abs
easy
hard
self-supervised prototypes
easy
hard
supervised prototypes
easy
hard
EL2N (1 model)
Figure 18: Extreme images according to different metrics for ImageNet class 500 (cliff dwelling ).
For each metric, the top row shows images that are ranked as “easy” (most pruneable) according to
the metric, and the bottom row shows images that are ranked as “hard” (least pruneable).
42
easy
hard
DDD
easy
hard
EL2N (20 models)
easy
hard
memorization
easy
hard
active learning
easy
hard
forgetting
Figure 19: Extreme images according to different metrics for ImageNet class 500 (cliff dwelling ).
For each metric, the top row shows images that are ranked as “easy” (most pruneable) according to
the metric, and the bottom row shows images that are ranked as “hard” (least pruneable).
43
F Impact of number of clusters k on self-supervised prototypes
Our self-supervised prototype metric is based on k-means clustering, which has a single hyperparam-
eter k. By default and throughout the main paper, we set k = 1000, corresponding to the number of
classes in ImageNet. Here, we investigate other settings of k to understand how this hyperparameter
impacts performance. As can be seen in Table 2, k does indeed have an impact on performance, and
very small values for k (e.g. k < 10) as well as very large values for k (e.g. k = 50, 000) both lead
to performance impairments. At the same time, performance is relatively high across very different
in-between settings for k. In order to assess these results, it may be important to keep in mind that
±0.54% corresponds to plus/minus 2 standard deviations of performance when simply training the
same model multiple times (with different random initialization). Overall, these results suggest that if
the number of clusters k deviates at most by one order of magnitude from the number of classes in
the dataset (for ImageNet-1K), the exact choice of k does not matter much.
k 1 5 10 50 100 200 400 600 800 1K 5K 10K 50K
acc 88.35 89.09 88.76 89.04 89.48 90.27 89.85 89.96 90.44 90.56 90.33 90.57 88.67
Table 2: Performance (top-5 accuracy, denoted as acc) when pruning away 20% of ImageNet
according to our self-supervised prototype metric as a function of the number of prototypes k
(hyperparameter used for self-supervised clustering indicating the number of clusters). Results based
on training a ResNet-50 architecture with VISSL without class balancing.
G Impact of ensemble prototypes
The self-supervised prototypes metric is based onk-means clustering in the embedding space of a self-
supervised (=SSL) model. Since even otherwise identical models trained with different random seeds
can end up with somewhat different embedding spaces, we here investigated how the performance
of our self-supervised prototypes metric would change when averaging the scores derived from ﬁve
models, instead of just using a single model’s score. The results, shown in Table 3, indicate that
ensembling the self-supervised prototype scores neither improves nor hurts performance. This is
both good and bad news: Bad news since naturally any improvement in metric development leads
to better data efﬁciency; on the other hand this is also good news since ensembles increase the
computational cost of deriving the metric—and this suggests that ensembling is not necessary to
achieve the performance we achieved (unlike in other methods such as ensemble active learning).
Fraction of data kept 0.9 0.8 0.7
score from single model 90.03 90.10 89.38
score from ensemble model 89.93 90.40 89.38
Table 3: Performance (top-5 acuracy) when pruning away 10%, 20% or 30% of ImageNet based
on the self-supervised prototype metric derived from either a single SSL model, or an ensemble of
SSL models. Supervised model training on the pruned dataset was performed with a ResNet-50
architecture trained using VISSL without class balancing. Overall, we do not observe any performance
difference between the two settings: the differences are still well within a single standard deviation of
training multiple models with identical settings. In order to reduce the inﬂuence of random variations,
each data point in this table shows the average of four independent runs.
H Relationship between pruning and class (im-)balance
Motivation. It is well-known that strong class imbalance in a dataset is a challenge that needs to
be addressed. In order to understand the effect of pruning on class (im-)balance, we quantiﬁed this
relationship. For context, if pruning according to a certain metric preferentially leads to discarding
most (or even all) images from certain classes, it is likely that the performance on those classes will
drop as a result if this imbalance is not addressed.
44
Class imbalance metric: pruning ampliﬁes class imbalance. Since a standard measure of class
(im-)balance—dividing the number of images for the majority class by the number of images for the
minority class—is highly sensitive to outliers and discards information about the 998 non-extreme
ImageNet classes, we instead calculated a class balance score b∈ [0%, 100%] as the average class
imbalance across any two pairs of classes by computing the expectation over taking two random
classes, and then computing how many images the minority class has in proportion to the majority
class. For instance, a class balance score of 90% means that on average, when selecting two random
classes from the dataset, the smaller of those two classes contains 90% of the number of images of
the larger class (higher=better; 100% would be perfectly balanced).
In Fig. 20, we observe that dataset pruning strongly increases class imbalance. This is the case both
when pruning away easy images and when pruning away hard images, and the effect occurs for
all pruning metrics except, of course, for random pruning. Class imbalance is well-known to be a
challenge for deep learning models when not addressed properly [46]. The cause for the ampliﬁed
class imbalance is revealed when looking at class-conditional differences of metric scores (Figs. 22
and 23): The histograms of the class-conditional score distributions show that for many classes, most
(if not all) images have very low scores, while for others most (if not all) images have very high
scores. This means that as soon as the lowest / highest scoring images are pruned, certain classes are
pruned preferentially and thus class imbalance worsens.
We thus use 50% class balancing for our ImageNet experiments. This ensures that every class has at
least 50% of the images that it would have when pruning all classes equally (essentially providing
a ﬁxed ﬂoor for the minimum number of images per class). This simple ﬁx is an important step to
address and counteract class imbalance, although other means could be used as well; and ultimately
one would likely want to use a self-supervised version of class (or cluster) balancing when it comes
to pruning large-scale unlabeled datasets. For comparison purposes, the results for ImageNet pruning
without class balancing are shown in supplementary Fig. 21.
45
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Pruning fraction
0
20
40
60
80
100Class balance (%)
(a) random
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Pruning fraction
0
20
40
60
80
100Class balance (%)
 (b) inﬂuence max
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Pruning fraction
0
20
40
60
80
100Class balance (%)
 (c) inﬂuence sum-abs
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Pruning fraction
0
20
40
60
80
100Class balance (%)
(d) self-supervised prototypes
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Pruning fraction
0
20
40
60
80
100Class balance (%)
 (e) supervised prototypes
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Pruning fraction
0
20
40
60
80
100Class balance (%)
 (f) EL2N (1 model)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Pruning fraction
0
20
40
60
80
100Class balance (%)
(g) DDD
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Pruning fraction
0
20
40
60
80
100Class balance (%)
 (h) EL2N (20 models)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Pruning fraction
0
20
40
60
80
100Class balance (%)
 (i) memorization
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Pruning fraction
0
20
40
60
80
100Class balance (%)
(j) active learning
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Pruning fraction
0
20
40
60
80
100Class balance (%)
 (k) forgetting
Figure 20: Pruning ampliﬁes class imbalance. With larger pruning fractions, class balance decreases—
both when pruning “easy” images (turquoise) and when pruning “hard” images (orange). This effect
occurs for all pruning metrics except for random pruning (top left). For details on the class imbalance
metric see Appendix H. Pruning fraction refers to the fraction of data pruned, from 0 (no pruning) to
0.9 (keeping only 10% of the data).
46
Figure 21: ImageNet-1K pruning results for different metrics, compared against random pruning.
‘Pruning fraction’ refers to the fraction of the dataset that is pruned away. Results obtained without
any class balancing are worse than results with 50% class balancing (Fig. 5BC), conﬁrming the
ﬁnding that vanilla pruning ampliﬁes class imbalance.
47
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
610
620
630
640
650
660
670
680
690
700
710
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
790
800
810
820
830
840
850
860
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
960
970
980
990
Class rank
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
random
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
610
620
630
640
650
660
670
680
690
700
710
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
790
800
810
820
830
840
850
860
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
960
970
980
990
Class rank
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
influence max
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
610
620
630
640
650
660
670
680
690
700
710
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
790
800
810
820
830
840
850
860
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
960
970
980
990
Class rank
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
influence sum-abs
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
610
620
630
640
650
660
670
680
690
700
710
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
790
800
810
820
830
840
850
860
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
960
970
980
990
Class rank
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
self-supervised prototypes
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
610
620
630
640
650
660
670
680
690
700
710
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
790
800
810
820
830
840
850
860
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
960
970
980
990
Class rank
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
supervised prototypes
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
610
620
630
640
650
660
670
680
690
700
710
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
790
800
810
820
830
840
850
860
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
960
970
980
990
Class rank
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
EL2N (1 model)
Figure 22: How do ImageNet metric scores differ across classes? Class-conditional score distribution
histograms across metrics. For the purpose of visualization, only every 10th class is shown.
48
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
610
620
630
640
650
660
670
680
690
700
710
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
790
800
810
820
830
840
850
860
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
960
970
980
990
Class rank
0
2
4
6
8
10
DDD
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
610
620
630
640
650
660
670
680
690
700
710
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
790
800
810
820
830
840
850
860
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
960
970
980
990
Class rank
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
EL2N (20 models)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
610
620
630
640
650
660
670
680
690
700
710
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
790
800
810
820
830
840
850
860
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
960
970
980
990
Class rank
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
memorization
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
610
620
630
640
650
660
670
680
690
700
710
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
790
800
810
820
830
840
850
860
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
960
970
980
990
Class rank
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
active learning
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
610
620
630
640
650
660
670
680
690
700
710
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
790
800
810
820
830
840
850
860
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
960
970
980
990
Class rank
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
forgetting
Figure 23: How do ImageNet metric scores differ across classes (continued)? Class-conditional score
distribution histograms across metrics. For the purpose of visualization, only every 10th class is
shown. Please note that the active learning plot is to be taken with a grain of salt since the authors
provided a binary score (included/excluded) for ImageNet corresponding to 80% “important” images,
thus the scores are either zero or one and a boxplot ﬁt does not apply here.
49
I Effect of pruning on class-conditional accuracy and fairness
In order to study the effect of dataset pruning on model fairness, at least with respect to speciﬁc
ImageNet classes, we compared the class-conditional accuracy of a ResNet-50 model trained on the
full ImageNet dataset, versus that of the same model trained on an 80% subset obtained after pruning.
We used two supervised pruning metrics (EL2N, memorization) and one self-supervised pruning
metric (self-supervised prototypes) for obtaining the pruned dataset. In all three cases, and across all
1000 classes, we found that the class-conditional accuracy of the model trained on a pruned subset of
the dataset remains quite similar to that of the model trained on the full dataset (Fig. 24). However,
we did notice a very small reduction in class-conditioned accuracy for ImageNet classes that were
least accurately predicted by models trained on the entire dataset (blue lines slightly above red unity
lines when class-conditioned accuracy is low). This suggests that pruning yields a slight systematic
reduction in the accuracy of harder classes, relative to easier classes, though the effect is small.
While we have focused on fairness with respect to individual ImageNet classes, any ultimate test
of model fairness should be conducted in scenarios that are speciﬁc to the use case of the deployed
model. Our examination of the fairness of pruning with respect to individual ImageNet classes
constitutes only an initial foray into an exploration of fairness, given the absence of any speciﬁc
deployment scenario for our current models other than testing them on ImageNet. We leave a full
exploration of fairness in other deployment settings for future work.
20 40 60 80 100
Class-wise accuracy on pruned ImageNet-1K dataset (80% samples kept)
20
40
60
80
100Class-wise accuracy on full ImageNet-1K dataset
Linear fit
Unity (y=x) 
(a) EL2N (20 models)
20 40 60 80 100
Class-wise accuracy on pruned ImageNet-1K dataset (80% samples kept)
20
40
60
80
100Class-wise accuracy on full ImageNet-1K dataset
Linear fit
Unity (y=x) (b) Memorization
20 40 60 80 100
Class-wise accuracy on pruned ImageNet-1K dataset (80% samples kept)
20
40
60
80
100Class-wise accuracy on full ImageNet-1K dataset
Linear fit
Unity (y=x) (c) Self-supervised prototypes
Figure 24: The effect of data pruning on ImageNet test accuracy on individual classes. For all 3 plots,
each point corresponds to an ImageNet class, and for all classes, the class speciﬁc test accuracy when
training on the entire dataset (y-axis) is plotted against the test accuracy when training on the pruned
dataset (x-axis).
J Interaction between data pruning and training duration
Throughout the main paper, our ImageNet experiments are based on a setting where the number
of training epochs is kept constant (i.e. we train the same number of epochs on the smaller pruned
dataset as on the larger original dataset). This means that data pruning directly reduces the number of
iterations required to train the model speciﬁcally by reducing the size of the dataset. However, this
simultaneously places two constraints on model performance: not only training on a smaller data set,
but also training for fewer iterations.
We therefore investigate how model performance changes if we train longer, as quantiﬁed by a
matched iterations factor. A matched iterations factor of 0 corresponds to the default setting used in
the paper of training for the same number of epochs (so that a smaller dataset means proportionally
fewer training iterations). In contrast a matched iterations factor of 1 corresponds to training on the
smaller pruned dataset for a number of iterations equal to that when training on the larger initial
dataset (e.g. when pruning away 50% of the dataset one would train twice as long to match the
number of iterations of a model trained on 100% of the dataset). Otherwise the matched iterations
factor reﬂects a linear interpolation in the number of training iterations as the factor varies between 0
and 1.
50
The results are shown in Table 4 and indicate that training longer does indeed improve performance
slightly; however, a matched iterations factor of around 0.4–0.6 may already be sufﬁcient to reap the
full beneﬁt. Any matched iterations factor strictly smaller than 1.0 comes with reduced training time
compared to training a model on the full dataset.
matched iterations factor 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
ImageNet top-5 accuracy 90.20 90.41 90.48 90.56 90.45 90.50
Table 4: Comparing different settings for training longer when pruning: Performance (top-5 acuracy)
when pruning away 20% of ImageNet based on our self-supervised prototype metric. Supervised
model training on the pruned dataset performed with a ResNet-50 architecture trained using VISSL
without class balancing. Performance tends to increase when training longer (i.e. with a larger
matched iterations factor). Interestingly, the beneﬁt of training longer may already be achieved with a
matched iterations factor of around 0.4–0.6.
K Out-of-distribution (OOD) analysis of dataset pruning
Pruning changes the data regime that a model is exposed to. Therefore, a natural question is how
this might affect desirable properties beyond IID performance like fairness (see Appendix I) and
out-of-distribution, or OOD, performance which we investigate here. To this end, we use the model-vs-
human toolbox [47] based on data and analyses from [48, 49, 50, 51, 52]. This toolbox is comprised
of 17 different OOD datasets, including many image distortions and style changes.
In Figure 25a, OOD accuracies averaged across those 17 datasets are shown for a total of 12 models.
These models all have a ResNet-50 architecture [53]. Two baseline models are trained on the full
ImageNet training dataset, one using torchvision (purple) and the other using VISSL (blue). Human
classiﬁcation data is shown as an additional reference in red. The remaining 10 models are VISSL-
trained on pruned versions of ImageNet using pruning fractions in {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5} and our
self-supervised prototype metric. A pruning fraction of 0.3 would correspond to “fraction of data
kept = 0.7”, i.e. to training on 70% of ImageNet while discarding the other 30%. We investigated two
different settings: discarding easy examples (the default used throughout the paper), which is denoted
as “Best Case” (or BC) in the plots; and the reverse setting, i.e. discarding hard examples denoted
as Worst Case, or WC. (These terms should be taken with a grain of salt; examples are only insofar
best- or worst case examples as predicted by the metric, which itself is in all likelihood far less than
perfect.)
The results are as follows: In terms of OOD accuracy (Figure 25a), best-case pruning in green
achieves very similar accuracies to the most relevant baseline, the blue ResNet-50 model trained
via VISSL. This is interesting since oftentimes, OOD accuracies closely follow IID accuracies
except for a constant offset [ 54], and we know from Figure 5 that the self-supervised prototype
metric has a drastic performance impairment when pruning away 40% of the data, yet the model
“BC_pruning-fraction-0.4” still achieves almost the same OOD accuracy as the baseline trained on
the full dataset. The core take-away is: While more analyses would be necessary to investigate
whether pruning indeed consistently helps on OOD performance, it seems safe to conclude
that it does not hurt OOD performance on the investigated datasets compared to an accuracy-
matched baseline. (The control setting, pruning away hard examples shown in orange, leads to much
lower IID accuracies and consequently also lower OOD accuracies.) For reference, the numerical
results from Figure 25a are also shown in Table 5.
Figures 25b, 25c and 25d focus on a related question, the question of whether models show human-
like behavior on OOD datasets. Figure 25b shows that two models pruned using our self-supervised
prototype metric somewhat more closely match human accuracies compared to the baseline in blue;
Figures 25c and 25d speciﬁcally focus on image-level consistency with human responses. In terms
of overall consistency (c), the baseline scores best; in terms of error consistency pruned models
outperform the VISSL-trained baseline. For details on the metrics we kindly refer the interested
reader to [47]. Numerical results are again also shown in a Table (Table 6).
Finally, in Figure 26 we observe that best-case pruning leads to slightly higher shape bias as indicated
by green vertical lines plotting the average shape bias across categories, which are shifted to the left
51
of the baseline; while worst-case pruning in orange is shifted to the right. An outlier is the torchvision-
trained model in purple with a very strong texture bias; we attribute this to data augmentation
differences between VISSL and torchvision training.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8OOD accuracy
WC_pruning-fraction-0.5
WC_pruning-fraction-0.4
WC_pruning-fraction-0.3
WC_pruning-fraction-0.2
ResNet-50 (torchvision)
BC_pruning-fraction-0.5
WC_pruning-fraction-0.1
BC_pruning-fraction-0.2
BC_pruning-fraction-0.1
BC_pruning-fraction-0.4
BC_pruning-fraction-0.3
ResNet-50 (VISSL)
humans
(a) OOD accuracy (higher = better).
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14accuracy difference
WC_pruning-fraction-0.5
WC_pruning-fraction-0.4
WC_pruning-fraction-0.3
ResNet-50 (torchvision)
WC_pruning-fraction-0.2
BC_pruning-fraction-0.2
WC_pruning-fraction-0.1
BC_pruning-fraction-0.1
BC_pruning-fraction-0.4
ResNet-50 (VISSL)
BC_pruning-fraction-0.5
BC_pruning-fraction-0.3
humans (b) Accuracy difference (lower = better).
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9observed consistency
WC_pruning-fraction-0.5
WC_pruning-fraction-0.4
WC_pruning-fraction-0.3
WC_pruning-fraction-0.2
BC_pruning-fraction-0.2
ResNet-50 (torchvision)
BC_pruning-fraction-0.5
WC_pruning-fraction-0.1
BC_pruning-fraction-0.4
BC_pruning-fraction-0.1
BC_pruning-fraction-0.3
ResNet-50 (VISSL)
humans
(c) Observed consistency (higher = better).
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5error consistency
WC_pruning-fraction-0.5
WC_pruning-fraction-0.4
BC_pruning-fraction-0.2
BC_pruning-fraction-0.1
WC_pruning-fraction-0.3
ResNet-50 (VISSL)
WC_pruning-fraction-0.2
BC_pruning-fraction-0.4
BC_pruning-fraction-0.5
WC_pruning-fraction-0.1
BC_pruning-fraction-0.3
ResNet-50 (torchvision)
humans (d) Error consistency (higher = better).
Figure 25: OOD benchmark results for different models, aggregated over 17 datasets. All models
have a ResNet-50 architecture [53]. Two baseline models are trained on the full ImageNet training
dataset, one using torchvision (purple) and the other using VISSL (blue). Human comparison data is
shown in red.
Table 5: Benchmark table of model results for highest out-of-distribution robustness.
model OOD accuracy ↑ rank↓
ResNet-50 (VISSL) 0.582 1.000
BC_pruning-fraction-0.3 0.578 2.000
BC_pruning-fraction-0.4 0.574 3.000
BC_pruning-fraction-0.1 0.574 4.000
BC_pruning-fraction-0.2 0.565 5.000
WC_pruning-fraction-0.1 0.565 6.000
BC_pruning-fraction-0.5 0.560 7.000
ResNet-50 (torchvision) 0.559 8.000
WC_pruning-fraction-0.2 0.556 9.000
WC_pruning-fraction-0.3 0.540 10.000
WC_pruning-fraction-0.4 0.516 11.000
WC_pruning-fraction-0.5 0.498 12.000
52
Table 6: Benchmark table of model results for most human-like behaviour. The three metrics
“accuracy difference” “observed consistency” and “error consistency” (plotted in Figure 25) each
produce a different model ranking.
model accuracy diff. ↓ obs. consistency↑ error consistency↑ mean rank↓
BC_pruning-fraction-0.3 0.075 0.671 0.194 1.667
ResNet-50 (VISSL) 0.077 0.671 0.184 3.667
BC_pruning-fraction-0.5 0.077 0.666 0.190 4.000
BC_pruning-fraction-0.4 0.078 0.670 0.187 4.333
WC_pruning-fraction-0.1 0.082 0.666 0.191 4.667
ResNet-50 (torchvision) 0.087 0.665 0.208 5.667
BC_pruning-fraction-0.1 0.079 0.671 0.182 5.667
WC_pruning-fraction-0.2 0.086 0.658 0.186 7.667
BC_pruning-fraction-0.2 0.084 0.660 0.175 8.333
WC_pruning-fraction-0.3 0.088 0.652 0.183 9.333
WC_pruning-fraction-0.4 0.099 0.635 0.169 11.000
WC_pruning-fraction-0.5 0.108 0.623 0.165 12.000
00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
Fraction of 'shape' decisions
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Fraction of 'texture' decisions
Shape categories
Figure 26: Shape vs. texture bias [ 50]: category-level plot. Horizontal lines indicate average
shape/texture bias; values to the left lean towards a shape bias while values to the right lean towards a
texture bias. For details on the plot see [50]; model colors are identical to Figure 25.
53